It took quite a while to get used to my new state of freedom—to have time of my own with no meetings to go to, no responsibilities, no constant emergencies. I took inventory. I owned my car, a 1929 Model A Ford which I had bought for $50 and which was in good condition. I had a considerable library, my own typewriter, enough furniture and almost $500 in cash, the last of my savings from my foreman days, which should be enough to see me through at least a year, living on the scale to which I had become accustomed in the Party.

When I sat down to write I found myself confronted by a totally unanticipated obstacle. Every theme I examined, every plot I outlined ran into a stone wall—it either conflicted with existing party policy or with the party line itself. When in desperation I turned to fantasy, the same problem arose—my elves and nymphs either spoke and behaved in a manner contrary to permissible party custom, or talked in a stilted party jargon. The fact was—although I was not clearly aware of it then—that a thoroughgoing Marxist-Leninist outlook, an approach steeped in dialectical materialism which by then was part of me, exerted a stifling brake on the imagination. Creative imagination in flight is soon brought lamely to earth when it collides with materialistic tenets, and it appears frivolous when contrasted with the graveness of the class struggle. Nor can a Communist writer turn to realism. Any truthful realistic treatment soon runs afoul of the party line which demands that the writer portray persons and events not as they are, but as the party officially declares them to be, which is usually a distortion of the truth. A Communist writer then must choose either to conform to the party line and thus sacrifice his artistic integrity, or clash with the party. When a Communist writer tries to avoid either course and compromises between the two, he will either find himself glorifying the party line at the expense of artistic truth or end up in confused sterility.

I was still wrestling with the problem of how to write literature that was truthful and still conformed to the new united front line, how to show the Communists not as they were but as watered down anti-Fascists as they wanted to appear, when I received an urgent call from Williamson. He wanted to see me at once, he couldn't discuss it over the phone. I was apprehensive that they wanted me to fill some emergency post again and resolved not to yield.

When I entered party headquarters Williamson greeted me with a friendly handclasp although he seemed somewhat embarrassed. He asked how I was progressing with my writing and then, without any preliminary, he blurted out:

"The party wants you to go to Spain."

I blinked. That was totally unexpected. True, eight months back, right after the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in the summer of 1936, I had asked for party permission to go to Spain to volunteer my services to the Loyalist government, but that permission was refused because at that time the party as well as the Comintern had completely misjudged the character of the Spanish Civil War, declaring it merely a fight between two capitalist factions and therefore of no concern to Communists.

Later, in the fall of 1936, when the Soviet Union belatedly discovered its error and decided to form the International Brigades I volunteered again, along with many other party functionaries who were also eager to take up arms against the Fascists. To our disappointment the Central Committee ruled that the party had too few leading, experienced comrades to spare any of us, that we were all needed here. Since there was no appeal from that decision' I soon put the idea out of mind.

Now Williamson had not said that I had been "granted per­ mission to go to Spain. " What he said was that the party <em>wanted</em> me to go. That was not volunteering, that was an order. There had to be a reason behind this unanticipated reversal, and I asked Williamson to explain it.

Williamson informed me that Comrade Mills from the Central Committee was awaiting me in the other office, that I knew Mills well and he would give me the details.

Saul Mills greeted me effusively. This was strange. Although we had known each other for years we weren't on particularly intimate terms. He was a short, stout fellow with padded broad shoulders, widely spaced eyes and with an odd, perpetual leer on his thick lips. He was in his early thirties, yet he moved with the ponderous slowness of an old, fat man—a deliberately cultivated­ habit to create the impression of massive strength behind his grotesque appearance.

He started out by saying that as I well knew the party had been recruiting volunteers for the International Brigades for months. I nodded, that was no longer kept secret. The <em>Daily Worker</em> had been publishing stories for weeks about the heroic exploits of the Abraham Lincoln Battalion which, practically unaided, had stopped the Fascists at the Jarama River and saved Madrid from Franco. I knew some of them personally, younger comrades like Joe Dallet, our Youngstown Section Organizer, Johnny Gates, our Akron Y.C.L. Organier, who were on the lower level of leadership and thus permitted to volunteer.

Mills who was usually very loud in speech now dropped his voice to a whisper. "The party is in trouble, Voros. All that stuff you've read about the heroic Lincoln Brigade in the <em>Daily Worker</em> is crap. If the truth comes out and the enemies of the party pick it up were going to have a tremendous scandal. The truth is that the Lincoln Brigade mutinied the first day it was sent into action, and had to be driven at pistol point into attack. The comrades in Spain are completely demoralized. They want to come home and many of them are deserting."

That was startling news. Published accounts of the Lincoln Brigade's heroic fight against the Fascists had generated an immense pride even in circles normally hostile to Communists. Mass meetings "To Aid Spanish Democracy and Fight Fascism" were successful beyond anything ever experienced by the party, and great sums were being collected throughout the country. Were the truth to come out it would indeed result in a mass scandal. I asked Mills for an explanation. The reason he gave was shocking.

The American party had recruited and already sent to Spain more than 2,000 young, courageous but totally inexperienced volunteers without bothering to investigate the conditions awaiting them there. Worse still, the party had been too niggardly with its leading cadres to send with those two thousand young men even a few older comrades of established prestige and proved or­ganizational experience, to set them an example and keep up their morale.

To rectify that monstrous blunder the party had now decided to send a minimum of twelve leading comrades to Spain at once. As the Ohio District was one of the strongest in leading cadres, it was ordered to release two. Williamson had picked me as one. When would I be ready to leave?

"Tomorrow!" I said without hesitation.

Mills was highly pleased. He told me I had a few days, I had to apply for a passport first. They had a reservation for me on the first ship leaving New York, the <em>Queen Mary</em>. I was to travel alone, without waiting for a transport to be assembled, to get to Spain as fast as possible. The recruiting was going well, he expected a few thousand more volunteers to leave within the next few months.


We then went to see Williamson. I asked him whom he had picked for the other man and when he told me it was Frank Rogers, I laughed. Frank Rogers, a member of the District Bureau, was a highly capable Section Organizer in Cleveland who had lately been critical of Williamson.

Williamson blushed and asked why I was laughing.

"You're all right, Johnny." I smiled. "Since you had to part with two of your cadre you chose the two you would miss the least under the circumstances."

Williamson tried to deny this, but when he saw that I bore no rancor he also smiled.

I told him that the party was free to help itself to my possessions, furniture, books, prints, etc. All I needed from that moment on was a suitcaseful of clothes. After 15 years I was leaving the U.S. with no more worldly goods than I had brought with me, and the chances of my return looked rather slim.

By that evening my apartment was picked clean, the comrades left nothing. Three days later my passport was at hand. In less than a week I was on the <em>Queen Mary</em> en route to Spain.

While waiting for my "silk ribbon," the secret identification carried by party leaders on special missions abroad, to be prepared on the "Ninth Floor" in New York and saying good-bye to the comrades on the Central Committee, Alpi, the Language Director of the Central Committee and one of the Comintern's trusted men (then going under the name of Fred Brown), called me into his office. He was a giant of a man with a small goatee trimmed in the urban, cosmopolitan style; his bearing, his suave manners, his quizzical expression, his broad forehead and open countenance presented a vivid contrast to the nondescript appearance of the rest of the top party leaders. A one-time cadet himself, he considered me a kindred soul and we were on somewhat intimate personal terms. 

Alpi was born in Austria near the Italian border of Italian parents and had served as an officer in the Austrian Army in the First World War. He had been an Irredentist trying to wrest independence for the Italians living under Austrian rule, and when the Austrian monarchy lost the war Alpi rose quickly in the Italian revolutionary movement. He was one of the principal leaders of the series of uprisings in Italy which were finally quelled by Mussolini's blackshirt Fascists after his March on Rome.

Alpi escaped and wound up in Moscow where his abilities were sufficiently recognized by Lenin to include him in the first Lenin School. That school was organized and taught by Lenin himself, its attendance was limited to leaders of unsuccessful Communist uprisings; it had only seven pupils. Other students in the school with him were Kuiisinen, leader of the Finnish revolution; Bela Kun, leader of the defeated Hungarian Communist dictatorship. Alpi had told me the names of the others also but I cannot recall them.

Alpi said he had called me in not only to say farewell but to discuss the military aspects of the Spanish Civil War. He complained that the military information coming out of Spain was biased and distorted by propaganda on both sides, which made it difficult to assess the true situation there. It was his judgment that by the time I arrived in Spain I would find most military posts of any importance filled by men who had risen from the ranks and that in all likelihood party politics would determine most future appointments. It was his opinion the Spanish Civil War was only a curtain raiser to a general Fascist war offensive in Europe and therefore the lessons of that Spanish war might prove of inestimable value to the future armed struggles against the Fascists. It was of the utmost importance to the party to know how the men both in the ranks and in positions of command reacted in given situations; to review the battle plans, the orders that were issued and the way they were executed, etc. Diaries were the best sources for such information, also unbiased and confidential personal interviews. He had been thinking about that for a long time and my going to Spain now gave him the chance to do something about it.

He had decided to authorize me to do just what we discussed, to collect diaries, to interview personnel, assuring them that their stories would be kept in utmost confidence and used only as a lesson for future struggles. Alpi saw I liked that and he added with a smile:

"That's what I would like to do myself if I could go to Spain. I would want to know what was really going on. This authorization might help you to learn more than the average soldier could, might give you more freedom of movement."

I realized immediately the importance of what he was saying . He, in fact, had authorized me to invoke his name if I found myself stagnating in a piddling party post, to give me a chance to move around. I thanked him for his trust in me and we parted, Italian style, with a warm embrace. When I was at the door, he added wistfully:

"I envy you, Voros. I hope they will find good use for you. That authorization I gave you, I hope you come back alive and bring the true picture with you."

Alpi and I understood each other. He was the only man in the top leadership who tacitly admitted there could be a truth other than what the party proclaimed it to be.

The day my ship was ready to sail I developed an overpower­ ing urge to say farewell to my parents. I had not seen them for years, we had become estranged when I joined the party.

I dropped in on them unannounced. I found them sitting in the living room, they both appeared aged and ailing. It. was a sad homecoming. The joy that lit up their faces at the sight of me lasted but an instant—it was replaced by sorrow as I made my way awkwardly to embrace them. After a halting exchange of a few remarks all three of us lapsed into silence, gripped by an emotional web too snarled to unwind by words. Finally my father broke the silence, remarking with sadness, "I see that you are still a bum, still tied up with the Communists."

"The Communists are not bums," I corrected him mildly. I did not want to get into another political argument with him, such as had sent me out of that house, storming, eight years ago, vowing never to return.

"They are bums. They are fighting on the streets," he said.

"You know that I am not a bum. I am fighting for everything that is good, that is decent." It was a plea, not an argument. I did not want to have a fight with him, probably the last time in my life I was to see him.

The old man must have sensed that. He did not want to fight either. But he was firm in his opinions and he shook his head in disapproval.

"You cannot fight for decency with bums. Bums do not know what decency is. To fight for decency you must be with those who are decent themselves. When you are with bums you be­ come one yourself."

"The Communists are the only ones who fight Fascism."

"Bums fighting bums!" exploded my father. "Roosevelt is the one who is fighting Fascism. When bums fight each other you never know when they'll join hands to gang up against the decent people. The Communists are killing each other now in Russia. That gangster Stalin is no better than Hitler."

"You can't mention Stalin in the same breath with Hitler." I was beginning to be aroused.

"<Em>You</em> can't," said my father cuttingly, "because as long as you are tied up with those bums you have to think as they do. But I can because I am not a Communist. I can smell a bum from a mile. Hitler and Stalin are cast of the same mold, they both smell the same to me. They know it but you don't. Some day you will find out and you will be sorry for having got mixed up with them. "

It was no use. He hadn't changed, he hadn't learned a thing. He was the same stubborn, shortsighted petit bourgeois clinging to his outworn middle class morality and prejudices. History couldn't teach him anything. No wonder that class was doomed. There was nothing more to say. I rose, kissed my mother, and went for my coat.

My mother was weeping silently. She did not ask where I was going, all she wondered was would she ever see me again. "Of course," I murmured, but didn't promise when. My father's eyes were also moist and so were mine, we each made believe we did not notice it.

My father walked to the door with me and said with a hopeless plea, in a voice choking back his tears:

"You are my oldest son! Stay away from those bums, Communists and Fascists alike. You're disgracing the family."

Christ, what a send-off! 

I shouldn't have gone to see them. That was a fine way to part with a son who, with the thin silk ribbon of the Comintern sewn into a hidden seam inside the lining of his jacket, was to sail within two hours to fight Fascism in Spain.

I wished I had not gone to visit them. Yet—it was crazy—I was damn happy I had!
