hi Ell MENTION the year 1929 to anyone familiar with the history of the twenties and he will immediately think of it as the black year of the stock market crash in October. But this was still summer, one of those beautiful lazy Saturdays which brings songs or at least a gay whistle to the lips. I rose late, made my breakfast, and leafed leisurely through the morning paper. A small news item caught my casual attention. It stated that beginning at midnight, according to an announcement by the Bell Telephone Company, regular transatlantic telephone service would be instituted between France and the United States. The call to France could be made from any regular phone in the United States and the price for a three-minute telephone conversation was given as seventy-five dollars.
	For some unaccountable reason this little item pleased me as if I had been handed an unexpected little present. I cast an affectionate glance in the direction of my private phone which I treasured as a mark of personal achievement. To me that private phone signaled the end to those furnished-room days when the landlady would yell up from the bottom of the stairwell, "Hey, there's a phone call for you." It meant the last of those suspenseful moments I had experienced every time the phone rang downstairs, the anxious search for a nickel before I could put a call through. This was my very own private phone; when it rang it was for me! That item made me gaze even more fondly at my phone, practically telling him, fellow, you don't know it, but

'34
beginning at midnight anyone can pick up a receiver just like yours and talk straight to Paris.
	Over my second cup of coffee I wondered what kind of a man would want to talk to Paris badly enough to throw away seventyfive dollars for that whim. What a thrill it would be to call up someone in Paris out of a clear blue sky. "What's the charge, operator, seventy-five dollars? That's all right, put him on." And then my thoughts wandered off to wherever such fancies fade away.
	Further back in the paper I came across another brief item which stated that Count Mihly Károlyi, former and first President of Hungary, his visa difficulties smoothed out with the State Department, would visit the United States to go on a lecture tour for a well-known New York lecture bureau.
	I was glad to hear that Károlyi had finally received permission to enter the United States. I made a mental note to attend his lecture and perhaps find a way for a personal visit with him. I wanted to learn more about the 1918 October revolution from him for my play.
	I spent the rest of that day in a manner befitting that balmy Saturday. I walked to Central Park, took a ride on top of the Fifth Avenue bus, and decided to top off the evening by having dinner at the Hungarian Workers' Home Restaurant and talk some Hunky for a change.
	As I entered the crowded restaurant fragrant with the spicy odor of goulash, stuffed cabbage, and chicken paprikash, I noticed Kovess, Balint, and Hugo Gellert in an excited and what even appeared to be a conspiratorial huddle over a table farthest in back. They were sitting right under one of Hugo's cubistic, violently red and blue-green murals. There was no food on their red-checked tablecloth. They were not dining, they were having a meeting. I waved hello to them and was about to seat myself at another table when they called me over.
It was an emergency meeting. Kovess was very agitated, Hugo

'35
was pale and nervous, and the usually witty Balint looked solemn and serious. Their discussion was about Károlyi's forthcoming visit. They felt themselves betrayed. I didn't know why, so I inquired.
There seemed to be quite a few angles to it.
Count Károlyi, who had been vacationing in France in 1914
at the outbreak of the First World War and who had been subse-
quently interned by the French, had opposed Hungary's entry into the war from the start. In 1916, when the French finally released him, he came to the United States to rally the Hungarians to his cause. His liberal views, his advocacy of land reform and redistribution of the land-all these coming from a Count, one of the richest members of the old Hungarian aristocracy, made him an idolized figure among the Hungarian immigrants, mostly former peasants now working in the mines and mills of Pennsylvania, West Virginia, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, etc. Old mustachioed Hungarians openly wept, women kissed his hands and the hem of his garment, and they donated over $Ioo,ooo to a Károlyi Fund for land reform. Subsequently, when the United States entered the War against the Central Powers in 1917, this Fund was frozen here by the government.
	After Horthy seized power in 1919, Count Károlyi went into exile in Paris where he drifted closer and closer to Communism by maintaining contact with Bla Kun in Moscow and the Hungarian Communist Bureau in Paris. Although he was not an actual Communist Party member, Károlyi had become such a close sympathizer that he had submitted himself to Communist Party discipline.
	Kovess, a man of bold imagination, had tried to bring Károlyi over here for another tour to build up the Anti-Horthy League and the Communist Party. Károlyi had been willing, but when he attempted to enter the United States in 1927 he was refused a visa and turned back at Ellis Island. Hence the announcement in that day's Times came as a bombshell to Kovess. Károlyi had 136
evidently now received an entry permit and was coming here, not for the Hungarian Bureau but to lecture in English to American audiences, under the auspices of an American lecture bureau!
That was an outrage, a betrayal of the Hungarian revolution.
	"We will break up every one of his lectures," Kovess vowed. I was amazed at that attitude. Károlyi certainly did not deserve that kind of hostile treatment. Why not let the Count finish his scheduled lecture tour in English and then be asked to go on a Hungarian tour for the Anti-Horthy League, I suggested.
	Hugo seemed to agree but Balint dismissed my idea with a wave of his hand, intolerant of my "political ignorance."
	"That would be like sending a whore down from the officers' bordello to the enlisted men after the officers got all the juice out of her." Balint was fond of military allusions.
	"We can't have him second-hand," Kovess objected. "He wouldn't draw the crowds-the novelty of his presence would be worn off by then."
	I persisted. I argued that Károlyi's lectures in English before American audiences would not detract from his appeal to exclusively Hungarian audiences later.
	My stand made no impression on Kovess. He kept insisting that Kârolyi would have to lecture for us first, or be prevented from lecturing at all. Hugo Geilert now also came to Károlyi's defense. They were personal friends; he had spent considerable time in Kârolyi's company on his last visit to France.
	"I believe Count Károlyi is not fully aware of the political implications of that lecture tour," Hugo asserted. He suggested we send the Count a letter at once explaining the situation and asking him to lecture for us instead.
	"Your observation is sound but your accompanying suggestion is not," Kovess reprimanded Gellert. It would take two weeks or more for a letter to reach Krolyi and another two or three weeks to receive a reply. Besides, it took time to organize a successful Hungarian tour. Taking the matter up with Károlyi by

'37
cable was also ruled out by Kovess on the grounds of needed secrecy.
	Hugo had another suggestion. He proposed to drop his work and sail to Paris immediately if the fare for his passage could be raised. We looked expectantly at Balint who then proceeded to give us a treasurer's report on the current fiscal status of the Anti-Horthy League. The League had a minus balance of $28 in cash, money paid by Balint out of his own pocket for current expenses, plus a couple of hundred dollars of other negative assets, such as long overdue printers' bills, etc. Kovess next reported that the Hungarian Bureau was equally flat broke, he hadn't collected his $i5 a week salary for over a month. He had been living on short rations.
	It was a dark, insoluble problem when I suddenly had my inspiration!
"Why not call up Károlyi?" I suggested.
They all looked at me as if I had gone insane.
"Call him up? He is still in Paris!"
	"Sure, call him up in Paris." I enjoyed my triumph. "Right one second after midnight." And I explained it to them. That changed the entire aspect. They were greatly excited. The problem then boiled down to one question: Where could we get hold of $75 cash? I had twenty-odd dollars on me, Balint had about ten, Hugo two and Kovess some small change. We next explored the possibilities of borrowing that seventy-five dollars until Monday. They were nil. Then another inspiration hit me. I was sparkling that night.
	"Why not make the call from my phone? That would give us time until next month to pay the bill." This idea was accepted with enthusiasm. I may have been politically naive and inexperienced but I certainly proved to be a reservoir of decisive practical proposals. We agreed to split the cost of that phone call among the three of us, Hugo, Balint, and myself, each contributing $25. Kovess also offered to chip in five dollars but we 138
turned him down. He protested, although he knew he couldn't raise that five dollars, and so did we.
	We repaired to my apartment in a state of great elation. I was particularly exultant over the juxtaposition of those two small news items. I could never put such an incident into a play, I mused, no such coincidence would be accepted by the critics.
	In the apartment we all sat down with pencil and paper, planning. The problem, as outlined by Kovess, was twofold.
	First, we had to formulate our plans and proposals so clearly that Károlyi could not possibly misunderstand them; secondly, we had to boil our message down not only to fit into the allotted three minutes but also to allow Krolyi sufficient time for his reply.
	It was not easy, although we had a couple of hours for it. According to Hugo, Count Ktrolyi had a strict, never-varying routine. He would get up at seven, shave, shower, get dressed, bring in the morning papers and sit down to breakfast precisely at the stroke of eight. Consequently, taking the five hours time difference into consideration we decided to make the call at 3:00 A.M. sharp, New York time.
	We worked away in deep concentration, discarding draft after draft as being too long. Kovess then announced that we should divide the call into five distinct parts. One minute for our message, forty seconds for Károlyi's answer, thirty seconds for our second argument, twenty seconds for Károlyi's second reply, ten seconds to be held in reserve for emergency, in case Kovess had to invoke party discipline to force Kârolyi to conform.
	That was precision planning, my first chance to witness the superiority of Communist organization, to observe a Communist Party leader in action. Everything foreseen by the scientific method of dialectical materialism, split-second provision for all possible emergencies! I could now see why the Communists had a valid claim on the future. I was awed.
'39
	It was superior organization and with four excellent brains working in brilliant co-ordination we had the problem eventually licked. We cut and cut, formulated and reformulated, evaluated and re-evaluated, phrased and rephrased, until we arrived at the irreducible which was yet crystal clear in meaning and purpose. Kovess then read the text aloud to Hugo. Hugo was to do the actual talking because KArolyi knew him personally and thus he would not doubt the authenticity of our proposal.
We sat in suspense while we timed it.
	"Hallo! Count Károlyi? This is Hugo Gellert speaking in the name of the Anti-Horthy League and the Hungarian Bureau. Now that you evidently have your American visa we insist that you cancel your scheduled lecture engagements and go on tour for us. We guarantee a mass audience of over two hundred thousand Hungarians. You will speak in New York, Cleveland, Chicago, etc., etc."
	Kovess read it rapidly, but it still took one minute and fortythree seconds-far too long. More cuts were needed and we fell to it at once.
	We cut out "Hallo"; this was no time for formal greetings. We cut out "Hugo" for Kârolyi knew what Gellert's first name was. We cut out "speaking," it would be evident that Gellert was speaking, KArolyi wouldn't hear him otherwise. Out of the phrase "Now that you evidently have your American visa" we cut "now," for KArolyi would know we were referring to the present. Cutting out "now" automatically eliminated "that" because then it would have referred to nothing. We eliminated "American": since we would be calling from New York Kârolyi ought to be able to deduce the reference was to America, and so on down the line. It was a severely tasking effort of excision, the editors of the digest magazines would have applauded our determination.
	Kovess now read it out loud again. By racing through it, he made it in 58 seconds flat with two precious seconds to spare.
140
We were jubilant. I turned the script over to Hugo to read it over to himself a few times, and when ready, I would time him.
	When Hugo began to read out loud we turned pale. Hugo was slow of speech and as he plodded on in his slow drawl the speech seemed to stretch into eternity. It took him one minute and fifty-five seconds to finish-a catastrophe. It was impossible to cut that message any further without loss of clarity.
	In desperation I set myself to coach Hugo in his delivery. Kovess and Balint were hanging on each word, their lips moving silently with Hugo's. All I managed to achieve was to bring him down to one minute forty seconds. It wasn't nearly enough. He had to speed it up more.
	I asked Hugo to read it over again, to stress his consonants, which would compensate for slurring his words and thus gain time. He tried it. Kovess and Balint were leaning forward, their eyes glued to Hugo's lips, practically pulling the words out of his mouth. Hugo was laboring under a strain. He became more and more nervous, his face became flushed, beads of perspiration appeared on his brow. Suddenly, without any warning, he went into a stammer.
	"The Anti-Ho... Ho . . . Hoho ... Hohoho ... Horthy Lllllll . . . Li . . . Lll . . . It was no use-he had the stutters, all right. We had no alternative but to let him rest for a while.
	Hugo did not touch liquor so all I could offer him was water. There was nothing we could do but sit it out. After a few minutes' wait Kovess wanted Hugo to try again but I demurred, it might have brought on another attack of stutters. We agreed instead to let Hugo speak in his normal delivery, allowing him all the time he needed, and to omit the rebuttal and re-rebuttal. Let Hugo take his one minute and forty seconds and close with:
"You have one minute and twenty seconds to reply."
	Time was passing rapidly. At ten minutes to three I called the operator again to remind her that we wanted the call to Count i4i
Krolyi put through at exactly three in the morning. A few minutes later the operator reported back that the lines were clear and she expected the call to go through as scheduled.
	Zero hour, three o'clock, was rapidly approaching. We were sitting in a tight circle, leaning forward to the phone, our eyes glued to the second hand of my watch; the clicking of each second sounded staccato loud in the room. When the phone rang we all jumped and four hands grabbed for the receiver. We recovered in time to let Hugo lift it.
"Ready with your call to Paris, sir?" asked the operator.
Four heads nodded in silent assent.
The operator couldn't see that.
	"Ready with your call to Paris, sir?" asked the operator again, with a slight edge in her tone.
	"Yes, operator!" we shouted in chorus. It burst forth in a roar, we had each found our voices at the same time.
	"Thank you!" said the operator and we heard her converse with the operator in Paris. We were so close to the phone that our noses nearly touched. The phone in Paris rang. Then rang again.
	No one seemed to be answering. Our tension mounted. The phone rang twice again and then we heard the receiver lifted.
	"Hallo" came over the wire and it was KArolyi, we recognized instantly the characteristic impediment in his speech. Four pent-up breaths escaped whistling into the air.
	"Hallo" came Krolyi's voice again over the phone. "Who is there? Who is calling?"
	This wasn't on our schedule. We nudged Hugo, who swallowed and then began to read his speech.
	"Count KArolyi, this is Gellert speaking in the name of the..."
	"Just a minute please," interrupted the Count. "Hold on just a minute. I just ran out of the shower when I heard the phone

142
ring. I am dripping all over the floor. Hold the line please while I get a towel." The connection was terrific. We even heard him shuffle off.
	This was definitely not according to the schedule. We glared at Hugo. "The Count with his never-varying schedule!" The paper was trembling in Hugo's hands.
	My watch was ticking away at 41.5 cents per second. Kovess grabbed the script out of Hugo's hands and made a lightning quick correction. It now read: "You have 52 seconds to answer."
	The Count came back to the phone and said, "Who is this calling please?"
Hugo started all over again from the beginning.
"This is Gellert speaking in the name of the . . ."
"Who?" shouted the Count.
"Gellert," Hugo shouted back.
"Gellert?" asked the Count puzzled. "Gellert who?"
	"Gellert, Gellert. Hugo Gellert," said Hugo, desperately urging recognition.
	"Hugo Gellert!" the Count shouted happily. "Hallo Hugo, when did you arrive in Paris?"
"I am not in Paris," said Hugo. "I am in New York."
	"In New York? How can you talk to me then if you are in New York?" The Count was both puzzled and incredulous.
"Over the phone," said Hugo.
	"Over the phone? From New York?" the astonished Count repeated.
"Yes," said Hugo.
	"Amazing," commented Kârolyi. "Imagine, over the phone, from New York! Can you hear me?" It suddenly occurred to him.
"Yes, I can," said Hugo, by now completely befuddled.
	"I can hear you, too," verified the Count. "What time is it in New York?"
'43
"Three in the morning," said Hugo.	Suddenly a last thought occurred to him.
"It's eight in the morning here in Paris," said the Count. "It's	"Hugo, we shouldn't discuss this over the phone," he admon-
the difference in time, you know," he added for clarification. "Is	ished. "You may not be aware of it but a call to Paris must cost
it raining there too?"	money, you know." He hung up.
"No, it's not raining here," said Hugo. "Is it raining hard over	We were aware of it. His weather forecast alone concerning
there?" By now Hugo too had become infected with the Count's	that slight rain in Paris, inconclusive as such amateur forecasts
delight in light conversation,	usually are, cost over eight dollars and sixty-seven and a half
This was a rout. We were paralyzed, unable to breathe.	cents. When the phone bill finally came it was for $189.55. Balint
"No, it isn't much of a rain," the Count assured Hugo. "It	paid me his $25. Hugo was broke, so he owed me his. Kovess
may let up any minute. Wait, I'll take a look." We heard his	never reopened his bid to pay the five bucks and that was that.
footsteps depart and a door being opened.	My curiosity as to what kind of a man would actually want to
"The speech, the speech, read him the speech," Kovess hissed	call Paris and pay $25 a minute for the privilege had been fully
to Hugo, pointing to the paper in his hands.	satisfied.
We heard the footsteps returning and the Count picked up the
receiver.	Eventually enough money was raised by the Bureau to send
"It's still raining outside, but it may soon stop. Again, it may	Hugo Gellert to Paris to deal with the Count in person. He
not," he qualified, a statesman unwilling to commit himself.	wasn't altogether successful. The lecture agency had threatened
I glanced at my watch, then held it up for the others to see.	an injunction to prevent the Count from speaking anywhere in
Three minutes and eight seconds had already passed. We watched	the United States except under its auspices. Finally a compromise
the second hand race on in mute horror.	solution was reached. The Count would finish his lecture tour
Finally Gellert managed to get down to business and read the	and then speak in a few selected towns for the Anti-Horthy
message, including the final part, "You now have 40 seconds	League. When Kiirolyi gave his first lecture in Carnegie Hall
to answer." Kovess had had the presence of mind to cut it down	Kovess had thought fit to teach him a lesson anyway, to warn
again,	him and to impress on him the consequences of breaching Party
"Hmmm . . ." mused Karolyi, "I can't do that, Hugo. I am	discipline. He had a number of Communists planted in the hall
under signed contract to that lecture bureau, you know. I cannot	who caused quite a disturbance, embarrassing the Count and
lecture in America for anyone but them. You know what, they	frightening the audience.
are even paying my passage," he exclaimed with delight.	On his tour for the Anti-Horthy League Kârolyi did draw
"Tell him that he must, he must," Kovess urged Hugo franti-	large audiences but nowhere near the crowds Kovess had antici-
caily, "tell him it is a Party decision that he must."	pated. Organizationally the tour was a flop, very few members
Hugo tried but he wasn't successful. The Count would hardly	joined, and the League remained a paper creation. Later it
let him put in a word, he wanted to do the talking. "Write me	changed its name to "Hungarian Anti-Fascist League" to add its
a letter," he finally concluded, "and I'll explain it to you more	weight of a feather and its nonexistent prestige to another Com-
fully in my reply."	munist front organization, the League Against War and Fascism.
144	145
	Kovess did succeed, however, in his secret objective, which at the time of that phone call had been carefully hidden from me, and which was the actual motivating force behind all that effort. With Krolyi here in person the Communist Party was able to set into motion that necessary legal machinery which eventually succeeded in unfreezing the KArolyi Fund which by that time, with interest, had grown to well over $15o,ooo. It was a shady kind of deal involving bribery and whatnot, and there were too many hands in it, including that of the Central Committee of the Party. The fight over the division of that loot was finally settled by Bela Kun and the Comintern in Moscow. Károlyi personally did not take a cent of it, the lion's share went to the Comintern and to the Central Committee of the American Communist Party. After it was all divided up and the expenses deducted, the share of the Hungarian Bureau and U) Elore together was far below the figure Kovess had dreamed about; it came to less than $19,000. Louis Bebrits, editor of the U) Elore, challenged even that figure when I discussed it with him later. I could never verify the actual amount even when I became manager of the U) Elore, for the movement never kept records of such transactions.
	Just before KArolyi departed from America I managed to spend an evening with him in his suite in a downtown Fifth Avenue hotel, the Brevoort, I believe. I found him a most charming and gracious patrician, a statesman and a patriot, a leader who automatically commanded loyalty. When we discussed the 1918 October revolution he admitted that even though he had firmly believed that the monarchy was a tottering corpse which would fall apart at the first real challenge, neither he nor his associates ever dreamed that it would disintegrate so rapidly under its own dead weight. They were completely confounded when the October revolution came to pass bloodlessly.
	I told him about the Kobanya incident, how we had marched out to shoot down the revolution, and, had we been given that 146
order, we would have fired unhesitatingly and accurately to kill.
Károlyi recalled that incident.
"I am glad you did not have to shoot," he smiled at me.
	Twelve years had passed since then. Time brings many changes. I was glad, too, by then. Very glad!
'47
LL IEJ Kovs.ss and I came to see much of each other; he would drop in on me whenever he could snatch a free evening from his crowded routine. As the secretary of the Hungarian Bureau he was the leader of all Hungarian Communists in the United States and Canada, directing and supervising all their activities. He was also responsible for setting editorial policy for the U) Elore, the Hungarian Communist daily, and writing editorials for it. In addition, the Central Committee of the Party had charged him with the task of involving the Hungarian Communists in general party work as part of the process of "Americanization" of the Communist Party, the membership of which, at that time in 1929, was overwhelmingly foreign born. His visits to me were his momentary escapes from the constant pressure he was under and I encouraged him to come and relax. This was my first experience with a real flesh and blood Communist leader and I found him the most stimulating intellect I had met until that time. He would challenge my every concept of society with biting comment and pungent observation, approaching every problem from a fresh slant and with startling originality.
	The key to this insight, as he explained, was the Marxian dialectical approach. To acquire this slant, reading Marx alone as I had done under his urging, was not enough-it had to become "part of one's blood through participation in the class struggle." Marx had merely developed the basic laws governing society, namely, that all social institutions have grown out of the eternal struggle between the masters and the slaves, between the ex148
ploiter and the exploited, and explained the methods by which the ruling classes have successfully managed to mask the depraved character of their activities behind a veil of hypocrisy. To penetrate that mask required a constant probing into the question: "Whose economic interests are being served?" However, a person militantly involved in the class struggle no longer had to grope for this answer, he developed it automatically in the course of fighting the class enemy.
	One night the talk turned to the concept of an ideal society. I maintained that Communism was a utopian dream. Kovess challenged that. His Communist society was beautiful in concept and plausible. He painted an enchanting picture.
	In a Communist society every person would have an equal right to a full share of the products of that society. With private profit eliminated, the productivity of such a society would grow so plentiful that working time would be cut to four hours a day, possibly even less. Leisure time would be taken up by hobbies, most of them socially useful.
	There would be no hoarding of goods for it would make no sense. Where a person was free to go to a warehouse and draw at any time whatever clothes or supplies he needed, he would find it not only silly but also a bother to load himself up with, let's say, a dozen suits and clutter up his home with them, to brush them, clean them and otherwise personally take care of them. He would take what he needed and come back for more at another time. Those who liked to see themselves surrounded by clothes, goods, or foodstuff would be made happy by being permitted to clerk in a store.
	Thieves-there wouldn't be any. No one steals a sea shell off the beach. If he wants to bother carrying it home it is there for the taking. If he wanted a particular shell that someone had already picked up, he could be trained as a small infant can, to recognize that certain toys belong to an older brother and sister, and to look for some other shell for himself.
'49
	What about rare objects, masterpieces, a unique location on a lakeside, mountain top or seashore? People's tastes vary. Not everyone likes a mountain top; the climbing may be too steep for some. Others find the seashore too monotonous, too humid, the frozen lake too cold and desolate in the winter. Objects in great demand and strongly desired would be placed in the public domain, masterpieces hung in public halls for all people to enjoy.
	Criminals, homicidal maniacs, sex perverts are sick people-they would be medically treated.
	Money was an artificial incentive, developed as a convenient medium of exchange in a culture based on private ownership. Greed was a by-product of that culture. As Lenin said, come the revolution the public urinals may as well be lined with gold as with any other metal.
	Capitalism rested on the incentive of monetary reward and on punishment by starvation. Yet even in a capitalist society it wasn't money which drove men to perform the most valued, most respected, socially most important acts.
	Does a mother nurse her child, change his diapers, because she expects pay for her services?
	Does a father stay up all night with his sick child because he expects a cash bonus for it?
	Does a volunteer rush into a burning building to save his neighbor's life because he expects to tender a bill for it later?
	How much cash did the man who did not know how to swim demand in advance before he jumped off the dock to try to save a floundering child and who himself drowned in the attempt?
What is the cash value of a Congressional Medal of Honor?
	How much money did the early Christian martyrs demand for refusing to say "Ave Caesar" and for letting themselves be mangled to death by the hungry lions?
	Does a medical missionary elect to practice among the abo-. 150
rigines in the jungle, instead of among the well-to-do in the suburbs, because he expects to gain a higher annual income?
	Men give their best for pride in achievement, for their inner satisfaction and peace of mind; to win the approval, praise, and admiration of their fellow human beings. A Communist society would bestow all those rewards and, consequently, because money would not be needed for a medium of exchange, the abolishment of money would cause not a ripple in the social fabric.
Would people be happier in a Communist society?
	Kovess hedged on that. All unhappiness caused by poverty, by inequality and social discrimination, by lack of opportunity, by lack of freedom, would simply disappear when their underlying economic causes had been removed.
I found the chink in the armor and pressed it hard.
	What about other causes of unhappiness? What if a man loved a girl who preferred another? What if a man was born ugly? What if a man wanted to be a great painter, writer, composer and he simply did not have it in him? What if some people wanted to sleep at night while others wanted to make music?
	Kovess brushed all that aside. There would always be individual problems. That was a matter of education, it belonged to the field of psychological research which would eventually yield the solution.
	A Communist society would be a happy society, the only possible happy society. It was an historically most desirable goal, the good society of the future. It was practical, feasible, and therefore historically inevitable.
	It was an enchanting vision. There was still more to it. This conception of an ideal society was no longer a dream. It was in the process of realization right then in the Soviet Union, under the leadership of the Communist Party, the elite guard of the proletariat. The Communist Party was destined to lead the downtrodden masses into similar revolts all over the world when the

'5'
right historical moment arrived. Kovess then urged it was high time I quit my ivory tower and took an active part in remaking society, handed me an application card, and invited me to join the Communist Party.
	I was entranced. Although the sweatshop in which I worked could hardly be classified as an ivory tower, the vision held out by Kovess was truly inspiring. This was the purpose in life I had been searching for-to help elevate mankind-and now I was offered a chance to participate in it.
	In the light of my subsequent experiences it would be easy to claim, as so many ex-Communists have done, that "I was duped." I hadn't been duped, nor was anyone else who ever joined the Communist Party. This is particularly true of those former Communists who joined the Party in the thirties when the great depression laid bare the glaring injustices, brutality, and fundamental weaknesses of predatory capitalism. Each of them, like me, had been led to the party by the vision of a perfect future society, each was motivated by the wish to become, as Kovess had put it, "one of the architects of the happy society of the future." I know I was. When I took that application card I was merely worried about one thing-whether my character was sufficiently strong to brave the hardships and hazards of the class struggle-whether I was indeed ready to sacrifice my material well-being for such a remote ideal. Well, time would tell, I might as well give it a try, I reasoned, as I signed the application card. Kovess was greatly pleased.
	"I knew from the moment I met you that you were the right Party material, only I didn't anticipate it would take you this long to come along."
	We then went for a walk and Kovess explained that since I knew English he would turn my application over to the New York District for assignment in general party work. This would put me in the mainstream of the American mass revolutionary movement. I was awed by the prospect.
152
	We were just rounding the corner to Gramercy Park when a policeman passed us. Kovess suddenly grabbed my arm in a nervous clutch and I saw his entire body grow tense. I became worried and asked what was wrong.
	Kovess' eyes were distended with hatred and he started to revile that policeman under his breath, the first time I heard him curse.
	I was astounded. That patrolman seemed a nice, rather friendly looking young man and I told that to Kovess. His voice in reply was harsh.
	"Police are all bastard breeds, born inhuman monsters. No humans, only beasts, could be induced to seize their fellow creatures made of flesh and blood and keep them locked behind bars, to deprive human beings of their freedom which is more precious than life itself."
	I was deeply impressed. That view of a policeman's function was rather new to me. Thus spoke a real Communist, a true champion of human freedom. I wondered would I ever develop such a spontaneous recognition of all threats to liberty.

&		A few months after that incident Kovess was transferred to
		Moscow to work in the Comintern. About a year later he sent
		me a card from a sanatorium in the Crimea; he was critically
		ill and his lung had been collapsed in an attempt to save his
		life from the further ravages of tuberculosis.
			That was the last I heard about him until the late forties, long
		after I had quit the Party, when by chance I encountered one of
		my former comrades who had just returned from Hungary. After
	describing the brilliant careers achieved by those of our com-
		rades who returned to Hungary after the Communists took
		power, he suddenly asked:
			"Of course, you know about Kovess, don't you?"
			"Is he still alive?" I exclaimed in astonishment. I had thought
		him long dead of tuberculosis.
				i53
	"I should say he is. He is back from Moscow and he holds one of the most responsible jobs in the country. He is in charge of all the concentration camps in Hungary!" he added impressively.
"What?" I exclaimed incredulously.
He repeated it and added that Kovess was doing a terrific job.
	I burst out in explosive laughter and I laughed uncontrollably until my breath came in gasps and I realized I wasn't really laughing at all. I was back in Spain at the time of the Civil War, my mind on the overcrowded SIM jail in Albacete in the Guardia Nacional, bent on the hopeless errand of rescuing one of our American volunteers from the clutches of the Communist secret police. I have never forgotten those verminous cells jammed full beyond their capacity, with barely enough space to stretch out on the cold stone floor. The nauseating stench of that human cage in that Communist prison suddenly filled my nostrils again and transported me to Communist Hungary.
	Two o'clock in the morning, when body resistance is lowest.
	A loud knock at the door. Rough voices demanding: "Open up!" Men in black leather coats with machine pistols drawn ransacking the apartment, ripping open mattresses, tearing down curtains. A wife or mother near hysteria and panic, crying children cowering in fright. A rough shove implemented by a kick with a boot: "Get moving, you filthy imperialist swine." The torture chambers of AVO in every Hungarian town, the crushing of fingertips, the squeezing of genitals, whips savagely slashing the naked buttocks of prisoners: "CONFESS, CONFESS!"
	Electrified barbed wire with machine gun towers; armed sentries patrolling with savage police dogs unleashed at their side. Inside the concentration camps half-starved wretches writhing in their sleep in dread of the morrow; toiling from dawn to dark like slaves of old under the lash of well-fed, warmly clad brutal overseers. Lording over them all stands the Chief Warden of all the concentration camps in Hungary, Comrade

'54
Kovess, patting the Order of Lenin and the Red Star of Rakosi on his breast that he has just received for doing a "terrific job."
	That Chief Warden with the master whip, that Red Simon Legree, is Comrade Louis Kovess who some twenty odd years ago had told me in Gramercy Park that no humans, only beasts, could be induced to seize their fellow creatures made of flesh and blood and keep them locked behind bars, that human freedom is
more precious than life itself.
It couldn't be, yet it was. It added up. It was dialectics. Yet there was more to it.
This was dialectics with a vengeance!
'55
23 Id WEEKS passed and then in September I received a letter. It came in a cheap white envelope, very poorly typed, with no return address. It instructed me to report to Section Headquarters of the Communist Party at eight o'clock in the evening on Broadway between 27th and 28th Streets where I would be assigned to a party unit.
	It was an old building and I found Section Headquarters on the second floor, as I recollect it, in a large unpartitioned open loft. A bewildering hubbub of loud voices filled that hall and I couldn't attract anybody's attention. The entire floor space seemed jammed with people grouped in circles; some sat on folding chairs, some of them stood, others squatted on the dirty, littered floor.
	It was a scene of utter confusion. The people in the center of those circles were talking to the people around them who in turn were calling and talking to people in the other circles. The groups seemed to overlap. I stood befuddled trying to orientate myself in that chaos until I managed to get hold of someone to show him my letter. He yelled out "Comrade Shapiro I" a couple of times and after a while a slightly built, red-haired young man came over to me. He had a peculiar gait, half shuffle, half shamble; he was slouched forward and he held his shoulders considerably hunched. He was around twenty-five years of age, with a prominent hooked nose and an incongruously thick lower lip; his pinched, narrow face resembled that of a fox. He was 156
Shapiro, the Section Organizer. There was an air of vagueness about him; he appeared to be lost in all that confusion.
	He glanced at my letter, wrote the unit's number on it, then pointed to a group past the center of the room, close to the rear.
	I weaved and bumped my way over and handed my letter to a woman who was sitting on a folding chair with piles of books, magazines, and pamphlets by her feet on the floor. She read my letter and announced in a pleased voice:
	"Attention, comrades. We have a new member here," and she smiled at me. The others in that group, there were nine, gave me a casual glance and resumed their conversations.
	The lady (she was the chairman and unit organizer) was friendly. She was a chunky, plain-faced woman around thirty; she wore her hair braided and fastened into a ring. She had two flashing gold front teeth and was wearing a darkish unattractive dress. She had no make-up or lipstick on and she looked like most finishers in the shop, women but not females, or maybe females but not women, whichever it is that is not a sex object. She spoke with a heavy Polish-Jewish accent. She told me that as a fur worker I would be assigned to work with the furriers' fraction in the Needle Trade Workers Industrial Union. I informed her I did not belong to the Union.
	"So you'll join it." She shrugged, disposing of that objection. "Why, you are very young. You should belong to the Y.C.L. You are a youth, you belong in the Young Communist League."
	I did not like that at all. I told her I had been a grown-up man for quite a while, a man twenty-nine years old was no longer a youngster by any standards. She insisted that the Young Communist League had to be built. I did not dispute that, merely stated, not out of youngsters my age. She then dropped that subject and read me a long list of topics they planned to discuss that night.
The term "discussion" was misleading.
She started the meeting by reading a long-winded appeal from

'57
the International Workers Relief-I.W.R., she called it. It was about a strike somewhere and the poor strikers and their families were starving and the I.W.R. was feeding them, they needed help urgently. A collection was then taken up. She turned to me first and I gave five dollars. The others gave nickels and dimes.
	Then came the International Labor Defense. Some strikers had been arrested, I do not recall whether they were the same starving ones or not. Money was needed for their defense. I now gave only two dollars, the others nickels and dimes.
	Next came a collection for some other fund, then still another. I gave one dollar each time, the rest, nickels and dimes.
	Then came the main topic. The Daily Worker was in a very bad financial situation, it faced suspension unless immediate substantial aid was forthcoming. I felt I had given enough by now so I contributed a dime. The others gave quarters, half dollars, someone even a dollar. Everyone was staring at me. It was most embarrassing, I even blushed. I would gladly have contributed more had I but known. But by now I resisted it; I wouldn't let anyone shame me into anything.
	The chairman must have sensed how I felt and said to the group in general, "He is just a new member. He can't tell yet what is important and what is not."
	Then they went on to literature. It had to be bought. I bought a copy of everything they had, about two dollars' worth. Each of the others bought only one pamphlet for a nickel. As I recall they made seven collections that night, maybe more.
	Next came the distribution of collection cans; there was to be a Tag Day that Saturday. I do not recall whether it was for the Daily Worker or some other cause. I was handed a shiny tin can with a slot on top and the chairman assigned me to the uptown stairway of the Lexington Avenue subway station at 28th Street. That was exactly one and a half blocks away from where I lived. 158
I was appalled. I had always entertained mixed feelings about beggars like most of us do, a mixture of annoyance, pity, disturbed conscience, and strong resentment at being accosted. Now I was assigned to become a beggar, right in my own neighborhood where I was known to all storekeepers, waiters, and clerks as a financially stable citizen. That was a situation I had not anticipated when I had filled out my application card. It was quite disturbing.
	Next I was given an armful of leaflets to be distributed on my way home from work and in my shop.
	1 read the leaflet right there and it made very little sense to me. It was in English but a most peculiar kind; each word taken separately was clear but strung together in long sentences they seemed to have lost their meaning. It affected me like hearing "double-talk" for the first time. I told the chairman I was puzzled, I did not understand the meaning of that leaflet. She smiled at me encouragingly and assured me in her heavily accented dialect: "Never you mind, you shouldn't ought to worry, after you should be in America as long as I been, you'll understand English just as good as me, you gotta be patient."
	When we adjourned the chairman flashed one of her warm gold-toothed smiles at me; she was fundamentally a nice person in her squat, shapeless way. As I was walking home I noticed it was past eleven o'clock. I was carrying an armful: leaflets, all the literature I had bought, and the collection can. Twenty-eighth Street was deserted. I passed an ashcan. There was no one around and on an impulse I dumped all the leaflets in the ashcan, except one which I kept to wrap around the can. As I walked away I became conscious of a strong feeling of remorse. I turned around to retrace my steps and retrieve those leaflets when I noticed a group of people turning in from the corner. That settled it. The leaflets really made no sense. Besides, I had been shamed, shaken loose from close to twenty bucks, had

159
been handed a collection can like a beggar. That was enough for the revolution for one evening without turning myself into an ashcan scavenger as well.
	Came Saturday and I dressed most carefully. As a final touch I even put on my new ioo% camel's hair topcoat, though the weather did not call for it. Much as I loathed the idea of panhandling, as long as I was going begging I might as well do it in style.
	Saturday morning traffic on Fourth Avenue was not heavy. I took my place at the subway entrance, my camel's hair coat over my arm, the can covered by the coat. Three youths who were together went down the steps. I let them pass. Two other men came, one following a few paces behind the other. I held out my can to the first one. My hand was hesitant, my timing poor, he never noticed the can as he walked down. I thrust my can out to the second man. He saw it, all right-he looked like a salesman or a clerk-he faced straight ahead pretending not to notice. Two girls came. I held out the collection can to them. They snickered, elbowed each other, and went down the steps giggling and whispering together. I became aware of a deep blush spreading on my face.
	More people came, men and women both. My arm motion became more and more automatic, more precise. The reaction of the people continued the same. They either pretended they didn't notice the can, or appeared puzzled, or contemptuous. I decided to be selective, to try to guess who would give, and solicit only them. The same reaction. A man came by whom I knew and I hid the can quickly under my coat. Then traffic became heavier, working people, tieless shopworkers. Some of them gave me a sullen look, some grinned at me derisively, one man contemptuously slapped the can away with his hand. I felt like jumping on him but it was too late by then. My anger was rising, I felt like blocking the entrance and shouting to them: "You poor damned miserable bastards, you'd better put something into that can! x6o
I'm doing this for your own benefit," then knock their heads together to teach them how to respond to kindness, to an effort made for their welfare.
	I stood my assigned post past my lunch time without receiving a single contribution. I would have quit long before except that my anger against those passers-by had turned into hatred against mankind in general and made me too stubborn to move. By two o'clock, traffic became so sporadic that I did quit. I walked into the cigar store farther down the block and asked the clerk, whom I knew, if he had $20 in change. He had. I went back home and as I broke open the rolls and dropped the coins one by one into the slot my anger slowly evaporated. At any rate, I had done my share and if the people were too stupid to realize their own interests, it was their own hard luck. At least the Party was not out any money even if it had to come out of my own pocket.
	The next week at the unit meeting when it came to handing in the cans I was somewhat apprehensive. I wondered whether my collection would be deemed sufficient, I feared they would guess I had not stayed all day.
	The first can was handed in and the chairman rattled it-it sounded empty. The comrade explained he had been too busy, he had been kept too long at a Section meeting, he hadn't found time to go out. The next can was handed back empty also. The third can rattled loudly. It contained 37 cents. The fourth can came back empty. When I handed over my can the chairman exclaimed happily.
"Comrades, this feels real heavy."
She rattled it and the sound came dull and muffled. A couple
of comrades helped her count it, they announced it was $20.87.
It should have been $21.12, for I had also dropped $1.12 of my other change in it. They evidently miscounted a quarter. I almost corrected them before I realized what I would be doing. Everybody enthused and the chairman made a little speech. She told them how that proved again the importance of recruiting new x6i
members to the Party, they had enthusiasm and took their assignments seriously. One of the comrades grudgingly remarked that he also would have done much better had he a chance to go out among the masses, had most of his time not been taken up by inner Party work in the district. He was the one who had collected 37 cents. The other comrades spoke in similar vein, they complained that all their time was being taken up with going to meetings in the Section, they had no time left for outside activity.
	The chairman partly agreed with them. She was the unit organizer, she had had to go to four meetings that past week, and yet she had found time to do some collecting because that was the most important task, the party couldn't function without finances. After all the money was in, the total came to a little over $25, the highest sum ever collected by that unit in any Tag Day. It was a big success and everyone was jubilant. Again I was handed one of the cans that had been returned empty. Since I was so good at collecting and had no other party assignments, I might as well continue with that party activity.
	The rest of the second meeting was similar to the first; continuous wrangling and mutual recriminations about tasks not carried out. I gathered that the activity of party members consisted mainly in going from one party meeting to another, now in the Section, now in the District, listening to what should be done but with no time left for doing it.
	One of the first things I learned was that a party member, in order to retain his good status, had to be dishonest with the Party, he had to know how to think up plausible excuses for not having attended all the meetings at which his attendance was compulsory, although he couldn't possibly have found time to go to all of them.
	I also discovered that in the Party nothing was ever carried out the way it had been planned or originally agreed upon. Our unit had two long-standing projects, one of which was the hold-

162
ing of open air meetings at which all comrades were supposed to be present. The first of these meetings I went to was supposed to have been held in an empty lot somewhere in the West ioo block, a slum section near Central Park West. That meeting did not materialize because aside from myself and the Unit Organizer no other comrade showed up. The second open air meeting we went through with, although, including the Speaker who had been sent by the Section, there were only four of us present. Another comrade who also showed up promptly explained to us that he couldn't stay because he had to go to another most important party meeting. The speaker, a heavy-set man with a strong Brooklyn accent, spoke from an orange crate while the three of us stood around loaded with pamphlets and leaflets.
	The speaker was very dull, he talked about Lovestone whom he denounced, ridiculed, and damned in turn. I tried to follow what he was saying but couldn't. All I learned from that speech was that Lovestone was a most repellent, physically deformed degenerate, a slimy counterrevolutionary, and a hairy capitalist tool. (Years later, when I met Lovestone personally in Cleveland at a CIO meeting, so strong was the impression that streetcorner speaker had made on me that I found it almost impossible to believe my own eyes. This Jay Lovestone, who had been General Secretary of the Communist party but later expelled, turned out to be a handsome, charming, highly cultured individual.)
	After mopping the floor with Lovestone, the speaker talked on, and it was pathetic. It was like talking to the wind for we were unable to draw a crowd. A few passers-by would stop, listen for a minute or two and walk on. Some of them would accept the literature handed to them, most of them wouldn't. They would leave as soon as they saw us approach with what they must have thought was "the pitch."
	The comrade speaker did his very best to interest them. He would raise his voice successively louder as he saw his audience

163
walk away. Soon his voice was hoarse and scratchy. He kept this hopeless task up for about three quarters of an hour and then he quit.
	After he stepped off that orange crate, he and the unit organizer estimated that we had drawn about fifty people. I thought they were joking.
	However, at the next unit meeting the chairman, in giving an account of that street meeting again set the figure of the people in the audience around fifty, pronouncing the meeting a very successful one. I had to challenge that, she was deceiving the party.
	In contradicting her report I told them what I had observed, that nobody paid any attention, that the few people who stopped did so out of mere curiosity and then immediately moved on. I told them that it was most important for the Party to stick to the truth because Marxian dialectics, like all logical systems, depended on recognition of the true facts for the development of appropriate tactics and policies. The facts were that a meeting of that sort could not draw or hold a crowd.
	I can't say I expected to be applauded, but I certainly did not anticipate the reaction that ensued. Comrade after comrade, none of whom had been at that street meeting, rose indignantly to point out my ignorance and even to condemn me. According to them, that street meeting had been a success. The Communist Party had set a brave example by holding that meeting, it had demonstrated to the masses that the streets belonged to them. The Party had exerted leadership, had taught the masses how to use their rights and voice their grievances publicly, had imbued them with courage to stop and listen. What if they had stopped only for a few minutes? That was an excellent beginning, soon they would stay longer for courage grows by being put to test.
	As they went on stressing that demonstration of Party leader164
ship, that "exhibition of courage" began to take on heroic proportions. One comrade actually stated that the storming of the Winter Palace of the Czar in St. Petersburg in 1917 by the Bolsheviks would not have succeeded had the masses not been inspired by exactly such courageous Party examples. Then the discussion turned personal. I was criticized for having fallen down on my party work as proven by my poor collections of late. There was some truth to that charge, for having realized what a fool I had been I took to dropping only my loose change in the can.
	Finally the Agit-Prop, the comrade in charge of Agitation and Propaganda, summed it all up. He welcomed my misdirected criticism, unfounded and ignorant as it was. The fact that I felt free to voice it was in itself a repudiation of the slanders of those antiparty elements who claimed there was no democratic discussion permitted in the Party. Then he pointed out the false petty bourgeois logic on which I had based my arguments. My arguments, first of all, showed defeatism in wanting the Party to abandon its right to free speech. Then he invoked MarxistLeninist science which went far deeper than bourgeois science. It had been conclusively established that more than fifty people had stopped. That meant a representation of fifty families, say 250 people. Every one of those people had at least four friends, which brought it up to 1,000. Here we were dealing with one thousand people who had directly or indirectly been exposed to a demonstration of Communist leadership and courage, which in turn must have left an indelible impression on them. Come the right time, the right revolutionary situation, those masses would suddenly recall that meeting, they would receive inspiration from it and would go into action, give impetus to the revolution. In short, the seeds of revolution had been planted deep. He was applauded at this point. Finally he warned me that although the Party encouraged discussion I should refrain in the future
165
from trying to spread defeatism and rotten bourgeois cynicism within the ranks of the Party.
	Those people were absolutely cuckoos I was angry with myself for getting mixed up with them in the first place.
I was through with that bunch.
166
24 i Oe night, weeks later, I received a telephone call; it was the unit organizer. She sounded both plaintive and excited. Where had I been? What had happened? To shake her off, I told her I was being kept busy in the shop. I am a poor liar and my excuse sounded lame even to me.
	Her mind wasn't on that. "You must come to a special meeting tomorrow night. You absolutely must be there," she said with a trace of hysteria in her voice, brushing my excuses aside.
	"I can't tell you why, over the phone. You're the huskiest man in our unit and we're all depending on you." That made me vaguely uneasy.
"I'm sorry but I can't make it," I told her firmly.
	"But you must, comrade, you must. Our entire plan is built around you." She was practically crying. "Maybe you're afraid? You are not really afraid, comrade, are you?" she screeched.
	I wasn't, not until then. But when she raised that question I immediately became so, which gave rise to the urge to deny it. I told her I would be there and she hung up in happy relief.
	I felt neither happy nor relieved. I had three clues to go on. They considered me husky, they wanted me to do something that required physical display of strength, and there was danger involved. What did they want me to do? Beat up somebody? Throw a bomb? As I pondered over it I became aware of actual fear. My imagination was racing wild.
Had they picked me to shoot it out with prison guards, to
167
assassinate someone, to lead an attack on Wall Street? I tried to reduce it to absurdity to allay my apprehensions.
	I was wretched and miserable when I crawled into bed that night, dreading what the morrow would bring. Paradoxically, the one thought that would have eliminated the problem at a single stroke, that of not appearing at that meeting, did not occur to me. That would have been contrary to my innate sense of honoring an obligation.
	Section Party headquarters was packed that night. The crowd was far bigger than usual and since the number of chairs was the same, more people had to stand. I noticed an intermingling of the units that usually met separately, the comrades were agitatedly conversing with each other. As soon as she spied me the unit organizer came over to me, gave me her biggest goldtoothed smile, and said she knew the unit could depend on me, that she had assured the unit I was the most sincere new comrade she had seen in years, and kept generally gushing over me. I resented that fussing and thought I would let her discover soon enough how mistaken she was in her judgment of me.
	When the meeting came to order there was but one point on the agenda-a mass demonstration slated for Saturday. The new District Organizer, I. Amter, intent on "bolshevizing the Communist Patty" and turning it into "a real fighting arm of the working class," had called for a militant mass demonstration to protest the sending of additional American Marines to Haiti. The demonstration was scheduled to take place in front of the New York Post Office downtown in defiance of a police ban, and a police attack was definitely anticipated. I wasn't much interested; Haiti was merely a geographical location to me.
	It soon developed why my unit needed me. My unit had been assigned one of the big placards and I had been selected, as the unanimous choice of the unit, to carry it. We were instructed that the police would concentrate its attack on smashing those 168
placards and we were to defend them. Other, smaller placards would be carried under overcoats or rolled up under the arm to be displayed at the right moment. Amter would lead the demonstration in person.
	My first reaction was a definite letdown. Is that why they called me, to march around with a large placard like the bums advertising Max's Busy Bee? Had I been asked to throw a hand grenade at City Hall I would have been more gratified. The demonstration was not exactly devoid of danger, the possibility of being attacked by the police, of being shot at, arrested and jailed was not one to be contemplated with equanimity. But I had faced that threat once before in Washington when demonstrating for Rakosi. I accepted my assignment as a test of my courage which, for my own self-respect, needed reassurance badly.
	The demonstration was to be a city-wide one, ours was only one of the sections participating. The Daily Worker had headlined that coming event for days, ordering all party members, under threat of expulsion, to turn out for the demonstration, and most of the front page of that day's issue of the Daily Worker had been devoted to mobilization for that supreme effort. We were going to have a real army, I thought, and that picture gave me confidence.
	Saturday morning dawned gray and cold and drizzly again, just like that time in Washington. I got dressed, paid my rent two months in advance, just in case, so I wouldn't be dispossessed if arrested. At that time I was wholly ignorant of American court procedures, of the legal safeguards protecting the accused in a democratic society, of bail, trial, sentence. I still thought in terms of the administration of justice in Hungary, where once arrested they threw you in jail and kept you there without trial as long as they pleased.
	The demonstration was scheduled to start at eleven in the morning. We were to assemble at Section Headquarters at nine169
thirty at the latest, pick up our placards, literature and leaflets, and leave by ten o'clock in small groups. At City Hall Square we were to form into units, the units into sections in their given order, and then march in a single mass column on to the Post Office where Amter and other speakers would attempt to address the crowd. It was quite a well-thought-out military operation except for a provision for reserves, and it merited respect.
	At nine o'clock sharp I left my home. I knew that would get me there a bit early but I was too keyed up to daily around. I forced myself to take slow steps and to look into shop windows to while away the time. I arrived at headquarters building at 9:25, just the right time. I walked up expecting to find a large crowd. When I reached the top of the stairs the door was open but the hall looked dark. I saw the shadow of a man just inside the doorway, he must have arrived only a minute or two before me. When he switched on the light his face looked somewhat familiar, he must have been the Comrade janitor in charge of the hail.
	That empty hail in that dim illumination looked dismal, and it was filthy with rubbish, cigarette butts on the floor, the chairs facing whichever way in hangoverish disarray. The appearance of that hall made me recoil in disgust. What was I doing there? Why was I getting mixed up with that queer messy bunch?
"Where are the rest of the comrades?" I demanded sharply.
"They'll be here," said the Comrade janitor with indifference.
	"We were all supposed to meet here at 9:30 and it's 9:30 now," I asserted.
He shrugged his shoulders. "They'll be here," he repeated.
	"But we're having a big demonstration today!" I exclaimed in exasperation.
	He shuffled over to me. He was a shabbily dressed, unshaved person, a worn-out, beaten down, superannuated waiter or cloakmaker operator such as you see all over the slum districts without giving them a second look.

170
	"You're a new comrade, ain't you?" he asked. I couldn't see what that had to do with it.
	"You new comrades are always in a hurry. You want to see a revolution ipsky-shmipsky right on the dot. It was the same way in Kiev in 1905 when we did have a revolution. Comrade, this is not Russia, this is America. The revolution will take a long time to come. I won't see it, you won't see it, your children won't see it. It will come, but it won't come on time."
	I wasn't asking for philosophical dissertation, I wanted action. "What about the demonstration?" I demanded.
	"It will be held, don't worry. If not in the morning, in the afternoon it will be held. The comrades will be there, the Post Office will be there, Haiti will be there, the police will be there, everything will be there. The comrades like to sleep late Saturday. So keep your shirt on."
	I left him and went down to Horn & Hardart for another breakfast to give me something to do. I deliberately stayed away until after ten. Let them wait for me now.
	It didn't work out that way. There were still merely a dozen or so people in the hall when I returned. My unit organizer was there, she was all dressed up, eager and excited as if going to a party. The other women comrades appeared similarly dressed up and stimulated. My observations later made me conclude that women in general are less apprehensive about being physically harmed. Putting women in the front line of action when violence is anticipated has always been sound revolutionary tactics. First, because women usually exhibit more militancy; secondly, the enemy, usually men, is far more reluctant to employ the same degree of brutality when faced with women that it would use against men alone. As to the morality of exposing women to the danger of physical assault, the revolutionaries make up their own moral code to suit their aims ....
	At ten-thirty the hall was still quite empty although we were supposed to have left that hail by ten; we were now a half hour '7'
late and not even the placards had been delivered. Finally the placards arrived and I was given mine. It was about thirty-six by twenty-four inches, made of heavy cardboard nailed to a crossbar fashioned of one-by-two white pine, designed to be hung from a hook screwed into a four foot pole also made of pine. The pole was roughly planed and the placard read:
H ANDS
	OF F
	HAITI JOIN THE COMMUNIST PARTY!
	We decided to wait until eleven for the others to show up. When we finally left at 11 :30 we were still only about thirty-five strong, although the party plan called for at least three hundred from our section. Out of my unit of fifteen, outside of the unit organizer, the Agit-Prop and myself, only two other comrades, both women, put in an appearance. The unit organizer expressed the hope that the others would meet us at the square. I laughed cynically. I was rehearsing a speech in my mind which I was planning to deliver to her right after the demonstration. It was to go something like this:
	"Listen, sweetheart! I carried your placard, I went to your demonstration, I bought your literature, I gave you money. But that is all your Communist Party will ever get out of me. You write and it makes no sense, you make speeches and they have no meaning, you plan and it is all on paper. You go on, piddle with your Communist Party, but I have other, more important work to do. Now good-bye comrade, give my love to the proletariat."
	It was quite a satisfying speech and the longer I waited in that hail for the comrades to arrive the more I embellished it until it became polished like dialogue in a play yet to be written. I was itching to deliver it to her right there and then but to have it sound really effective-that had to wait until after the demonstration.

172
	We took the Broadway subway downtown, traveling in groups of two and three in a conspiratorial fashion, acting as if we did not know each other. We were about as inconspicuous as a flock of sheep on Madison Avenue but it did not matter. The other occupants of the subway car contemplated us with that vacant curiosity New Yorkers would give to anything, including sheep.
	When we arrived at City Hall, instead of the thousands I was led to expect I found only a few hundred people who looked like comrades. They loitered around with a furtive air, elaborately avoiding recognition of each other. Some of them carried pine posts similar to mine, hiding the placards under their overcoats.
	We stood around until Amter arrived. He was about fifty, tall and lean, smooth-shaven, with a sharply chiseled profile, his jaw twisted slightly to one side. He was surrounded by some of his lieutenants and appeared too nervous to be a good leader, but when I saw his eyes it was all right, it wasn't from fear. I had developed a sort of apprehension over the fate of this demonstration, I feared that it would turn out to be a fizzle, very much like that open air meeting our unit had held. I didn't give a hoot about Haiti but once I had committed myself to that demonstration I wanted to see it through. As soon as I had laid eyes on Amter from a close distance I knew that the demonstration would go through, even if not on schedule, even if only a fraction of the comrades would turn out for it.
	Soon the word came down and we formed into an irregular column, four-five-six in a file. I took my place next to the unit organizer. She was a peculiar person, but basically nice; I wanted to protect her.
	We marched a short distance to what I guessed was the Post Office, a grimy old stone building, as I recall. A narrow sidewalk ran all around it, at least we circled it, marching around and around in silence without crossing another street.
Policemen were stationed all over the place. They were nervous '73
and apprehensive, fingering their clubs, alternately tightening and releasing their grip. I observed a strong line of them drawn up on the far side of the sidewalk, and a number of mounted police were patrolling the street that separated us from them. The horses were excited, they kept neighing and rearing, the police who rode them were taut and nervous, which made us taut and nervous also. Those sleek, well-fed horses loomed huge and threatening, arousing the primitive dread of the beast. As I watched the horses clawing the pavement with their hoofs, champing at the bit, their beefy, powerfully built riders with clubs and pistols openly exposed holding them in rein with effort, my mind flashed back to the quivering Indians of Mexico when they were first faced by the mounted monsters of Cortez. We shuffled around in tense silence, around and around that Post Office endlessly, when the order came down to shout slogans. I couldn't think of any. Then I remembered the slogan on my placard and started crying:
"Hands off Haiti! Hands off Haiti!"
	Everybody was shouting his own slogan and it made quite a noise although the words were indistinguishable. We expected the police to charge us at any moment and were bracing ourselves to meet it but nothing happened, and soon the order came down to raise our placards which until then we had kept hidden under our coats.
	I hooked mine up and raised it, so did the others, and in a flash that drab picket line burst ablaze with signs of all description. That spark of action and the splash of all those multicolored signs triggered our pent-up tension. We burst into a wild chant: "Hands off Haiti, Hands off Haiti." Then there was a rush and the police attacked us, the mounties in the lead.
	The charge hit us broadside right where I was, a policeman on his horse slamming into us right in front of me, men and women trampled down by the horse, the policeman swinging down at them with his club. I heard a horse snort back of me,

'74
charging in, and I whirled. The horse was coming right at me. I was trapped, the sidewalk was too narrow to shift. The horse was going to trample me down! The horse was coming in fast, his snort bursting at my eardrum, the mountie standing in his stirrup, his club raised, two more steps and the charge would pin me right against the building. I raised my pole and thrust it in the face of the horse. The horse reared, jerking its head aside, and I side-stepped, grabbing for his bridle. It was high and I jumped for it when I was jarred by a terrific smash, the mounted policeman clubbed the placard right off its post. The swing carried him ahead of me, he half turned back in his saddle, he raised his club again, then lowered it to control his horse which was now rearing high on its hind legs to avoid smashing into the building. The horse was teetering, it was about to come down on me, and I blindly thrust up my pole to stick it into its flank but the horse avoided it and came down on all fours sideways, carrying the mountie away from me.
	I was in a daze, trying to catch my breath, when a blinding pain exploded in my left shoulder. I swung around. It was a policeman on foot raising his club again when a third policeman smashed right into me and I was flying in the air, sailing into the street. I landed on my palms, toes, and one knee. I jumped up and the fight by now had by-passed me, the policemen were running ahead of me tackling what was left of the column which was all broken up. I saw Amter and a few others running toward the Elevated. I thought of following them but they were too far ahead for me to catch up. The large crowd of bystanders who had been held on the opposite sidewalk by the police now came swarming all over the pavement. It took me a few moments to realize I was now safe among them. My palms were sore and dirty black, the knuckles of my right hand were skinned, my spine and my shoulders were throbbing, my left arm felt paralyzed. The pain in my arm was agonizing, it was as if a red-hot iron rod had been rammed into the marrow of my bone. I moved

'75
my fingers, they were O.K.; I tested my arm, it could swing back and forth although the motion was excruciating; it could also move in a circle though I couldn't raise it, so it was not fractured.
	The pain in my arm was centered in the biceps and it wouldn't let down, it was a stabbing ache and I was growing more and more angry. "The sonofabitches! The sonofabitches! They had no right to do that to me." The street was littered with torn placards. I looked for mine and found an irregularly torn piece of it. I picked it up. It now read:
AND
	F
HAITI
	"And you, too!" I thought. I did not think it funny, I was bitter. I rolled up that torn piece and put it under my good arm, I don't know why, I believe as a sign that I hadn't surrendered.
	I was making my way to the subway when I saw my unit organizer. She was still full of tension and I was glad she hadn't been hurt. She was talking a blue streak in her excitement but I wasn't listening, I kept repeating over and over to myself, "The sonofabitches! The sonofabitches!" Then I heard the unit organizer ask me again:
	"What is it you said you wanted to tell me after the demonstration, Comrade?"
	I looked at her and remembered, and came out with it. But it wasn't the speech I had so carefully rehearsed that morning, not even remotely like it.
	"What is our damn unit doing besides attending meetings?" I asked her grimly. "I want to be really doing something, be real active."
	She told me about the long-range project the unit had, the organizing of a laundry. They had been working on that on and off for months but she couldn't get the other comrades to 176
help her systematically, they were too busy with their other meetings. We discussed the problem and we agreed right there and then that we would distribute leaflets in front of that laundry next Wednesday immediately we got off work. She would bring the leaflets, she had them at her home. That was just fine with

me. "The sonofabitches! I'll show them yet .... I spent half of that night nursing my arm, it was painful far
beyond anything I had ever experienced. I couldn't call a doctor,
he would have had to report me to the police.
	I was learning, learning on my skin and bone, that authority could arbitrarily draw a line in utter disregard of constitutional guarantees, in violation of free speech, free assembly, and woe to him who dared challenge that arbitrary action. But I also learned that those unlawful acts can be challenged and must be challenged, otherwise those rights would be lost by default. Personally I was for challenging it; I was in the Party to stay.
	I wasn't quite sure what was going on in Haiti, but we had a right to voice our protest. No harm would have been done had they let us demonstrate; they could have let us parade up and down, let us listen to Amter, then have the police disperse us as they had in Washington. We hadn't provoked violence, we hadn't started it. The police had started the violence, they were the ones who had invoked it and used it. We had offered no resistance except in self-defense. I decided that the next time I would want a sharpened pole to take along with me.
	Violence is a double-action weapon. Some people may be clubbed away, some people may be clubbed right back. I did not know it then but that bit of unjustified police violence was to make a Communist organizer out of me, a professional revolutionary, as Lenin had advocated way back in 1908.
	"The sonofabitches! The sonofabitches! And just when I was quitting the Party for good!"
'77
25 il WEDNESDAY afternoon I left the shop early. I didn't tell the boss why and he didn't ask. My arm was still stiff and I had hardly done any work anyway. I had blamed my injury on a fall and nobody in the shop had questioned it. I met the unit organizer at Pennsylvania Station and we took the subway to Times Square, shuttled over to Grand Central, and took the local uptown. The laundry was located in Harlem, near the East River.
	On the way uptown I read over one of the leaflets and I was dismayed. It had been crudely mimeographed, a blotchy, messy job, you felt like throwing it away unread. The message it contained was even worse.
	Whoever wrote that leaflet was addicted to those long, involved, intricate sentences that impede the flow of the original thought, obscure enough to begin with. The general drift of it was that the workers in that laundry were being exploited and brutally oppressed by the Wall Street imperialists and finance capitalists, who were doing the same thing in China and other parts of the world. In order to better their miserable conditions and wretched existence, the leaflet urged them to build the TUUL, organize the Laundry Workers Industrial Union, and defend the Soviet Union.
	It was a general tract utterly divorced from actual life. It could have been equally directed to any group of workers by simply changing the word "laundry" to that of some other industry. It took many years for the inept Communist Party 178
to learn that workers in different industries had to be approached specifically, that one hat did not cover them all. That leaflet was as practical, in a reverse sort of a way, as those articles in the Sunday magazine sections that explained how easy the road to riches actually was; how others have become rich by simply getting hold of a few mines, railroads, banks, then consolidating and merging them-a real practical guide, any American could do it easily if he went about it the right way.
	I was questioning in my mind if there was any sense to distributing those leaflets when the train lurched and threw me back against the seat. My arm started to throb again and then I was sure there was good sense to it. "The sonofabitches!" Some seed might take hold, some seed might sprout . . . Had that general party mobilization not been a flop, had we had a few thousand more workers at that demonstration, we could have made hash of those horses, we could have chewed up those policemen!
	The laundry loomed huge and grim in the dusk, the big windows shone dull yellow from the electric lights burning inside. It was nearly five, the workers would be coming out soon. We took up positions a half block away from the gate, on the left sidewalk where most of them would be passing. I suggested that we each take one sidewalk but the unit organizer advised that we stay together, and I readily saw her point.
	The employees' entrance suddenly opened wide and the workers started coming out. Most of them were women, mainly Negroes, but there were a few whites among them too, mostly men.
	The older women walked quickly and usually singly, the younger ones more slowly and in groups of two or more. We thrust our leaflets at them as they passed us. Most of them ignored us and some even pushed our hands away, but a few accepted the leaflets and glanced at them before putting them in their handbags or pockets. The crowd soon began to thin and

'79
we were coaxing them loudly: "Here, take it, take it home and read it, it will tell you all about the union," and so on. Some of the workers were definitely hostile, particularly the men, but most of them manifested indifference. A few of those who took the leaflets did so with a smile.
	The crowd was now definitely gone, only a few stragglers were coming out of the laundry. We hadn't done too well, we still had most of our leaflets left. Two Negro girls were approaching and I offered them each a leaflet, saying:
"Here, take this, this will do you good."
	They stopped in front of me chuckling and looked me over provocatively. They were nearly as tall as I, young looking, full bodied, their laughter was deep and rich. One of them slowly pushed my arm away and said:
	"I got somethin' too, that'll do you good, white boy. How'd you like a nice black pussy for a dollar?"
	They both laughed and that made me smile too although I was a bit embarrassed. Then the other one spoke up.
	"How about it, white boy? How'd you like to change your luck?"
	Now they really laughed. I turned away from them and they left, chuckling deep in their throats.
	The show was over, it had lasted less than twenty minutes. I felt very low. I had quit my shop early to help these laundry workers to a better life and not only were most of them indifferent but some were downright hostile and insulting. It was a difficult task indeed to elevate the masses!
	The unit organizer was in an entirely different mood. She was elated over our success and told me she would report our accomplishment directly to the District. She praised my effort, told me I was quite an extraordinary new member, and invited me to her house for a bite to eat and a glass of tea to warm up. I declined. It was too early for dinner and I wasn't cold, I was wearing my new camel's hair coat.
18o
	I went home, changed, went out for dinner, came back, picked up a book to read but was unable to concentrate on it. My mind kept going back to that laundry. I relived that scene, the workers swarming through the gate, their walk, their faces, their gestures, how they ignored or waved aside the leaflets, the look on the faces of those who had accepted them. It was an endless procession of images and it wouldn't come to a halt.
	I was listless and restless. I dropped the book and paced up and down in my room. I recalled those two Negro girls with their rich, throaty chuckle; the unit organizer inviting me to warm up with a hot glass of tea.
	"Tea ... !" It suddenly struck me. I knew now what the trouble was. I went to the phone and made a call.
The party did not answer.
	I called a second number. She had a date for that evening. If only I had called a half hour sooner .
The third girl I called was out.
	The fourth expressed herself as thrilled. However, she was indisposed.
	"How about next Monday? Or if you're in the mood to spend a quiet evening . . .
I wasn't.
I called a fifth number. She had just left.
	The sixth number didn't answer. It was no use. My thoughts went back to the unit organizer. She was chunky and had flashy gold teeth, yet she wasn't so bad. I decided to call her, then realized I did not know her phone number, nor her address. I put on a record but the music sounded flat.
All in all, quite a frustrating evening.
i8x
26 1J A FEW nights later Kovess called. It was most urgent, he couldn't discuss it over the phone, he wanted me to see him the next day, Saturday afternoon, in the editorial offices of the U) Elore.
	The editorial offices were on the third floor of a shabby walk-up building at 16 Union Square. When I asked for Kovess he came out to greet me and invited me for a cup of coffee in the co-operative cafeteria downstairs. I wasn't a coffee drinker but went along with him. Instead of taking one cup, Kovess placed two cups of coffee on his tray, both for himself, led me to an empty table, put sugar in both cups and, stirring both simultaneously, he plunged right into the subject.
	The U) Elore was in an editorial crisis. It was already down to a staff of five, one of whom was a secret Lovestoneite and had to be kicked out, which left only four. To add to the crisis the Central Committee had decided to move Kovess out of the Hungarian field and promote him to Secretary of all the Language Bureaus in the United States, which left the U) Elore with a staff of only three who could not cope with the task of bringing out a national daily paper.
	For a permanent solution they had appealed to Bla Kun in the Comintern to send them a man from among the revolutionary Hungarian writers living in exile in Moscow. Bla Kun came through, he wrote that a man had been picked and steps were being taken to smuggle him into the United States, but that was

182
expected to take two months. The Hungarian Bureau had decided that I was to fill in for those two months, until the arrival of that comrade from Moscow.
	I was flabbergasted. What did I know about Communism? How could I possibly interpret Communist Party policies?
	Kovess readily ceded those points. In quality, a Communist paper definitely ranked far above an ordinary capitalist newspaper not only because of its superior Marxist-Leninist editorial approach but also because of the quality of the people on its staff who were carefully chosen from the ranks of the most able leaders of the revolutionary working class. I clearly did not qualify but-this was an emergency. Was I ready to start on Monday?
	I wasn't ready to start at any time. For one thing, I had little respect for the U) Elore; it was very poorly written and edited. Secondly, I liked my job and was loyal to my boss. I told Kovess I wasn't interested.
	"It is the decision of the Party that you go on the staff of the U) El-re!" Kovess informed me. "A Party decision is binding on all Communists!" he added incisively.
	It was now a question of was I really a Communist. I wasn't sure. I felt my arm. It was still sore, but not too bad. I still said automatically, "The sonofabitches," but without any heat.
"What if I won't accept that decision?" I challenged.
"Then you could no longer belong to the Communist Party!"
"So what! I could still be a Communist from the outside."
Kovess' face turned harsh, there was fury in his voice.
"No, comrade. Once you quit the party you're automatically
on the other side. Remember that soldier in John Reed's Ten
Days That Shook the World who kept repeating: 'Those who are not with us are against us'? He was a simple, illiterate rnuzhik, but even he understood that historical truth. Your attitude reflects the historical weakness of the petty-bourgeois intel183
lectual, the typical vacillation of the liberal fence-sitter who in a crisis usually sides with his own petty-bourgeois class and personal interests."
	It was an effective speech. My respect for Kovess went up another notch. Here was a person who would view every problem with historical objectivity. I did not know then that this was "standard operational procedure" to be used against all who wavered in their loyalty to the Communist Party, and that I too, as a party functionary, would be using it in the same way countless times in the years to come.
	I told Kovess that I wasn't at all enchanted by what I had seen of the party in action. Their discussions were vapid, their work was ineffective, their discipline was poor. In fact, I considered belonging to the party a waste of my time and was seriously considering quitting it anyway.
	Kovess' entire attitude changed and his voice took on a conciliatory tone. Yes, most of what I said was unquestionably true. But didn't I see that was precisely the reason the party was being bolshevized, why the party desperately needed new blood, new leadership material like me. At the Uj Elore I would be working with mature, experienced Hungarian revolutionary leaders, unlike those sectarian rank-and-file American comrades in the unit-a rare opportunity for my political development.
	"You'll find those two months the most rewarding experience in your life," Kovess tempted me.
	Well, it was for two months only, and the prospect of my political development did sound rather attractive.
"Will you start on Monday?" Kovess pressed.
	"I couldn't possibly walk out on my boss just like that, I'd have to give him at least two weeks notice to find someone in my place."
	"Nonsense," said Kovess. "You're a Communist, you must rise above such petty-bourgeois conceptions. Loyalty to a boss is the loyalty of the slave to the whip."
184
	Here was that dazzling insight again. How unerringly these people cut straight to the core of every social relationship. To develop that faculty, one really had to be part of the class struggle. My boss was all right, a good man as far as bosses went, but still a chiseling exploiter. He had only paid me for a oneweek vacation that summer although he had promised two.
	"You'll get paid twenty-five dollars a week," said Kovess. I was then getting a hundred. Twenty-five dollars a week would barely cover my rent and phone bill. That seventy-five dollars a week difference plus my Christmas bonus of five hundred coming to me for all the overtime I had put in and which I would now be forfeiting, would come to about a thousand dollars-a tremendous dent in my savings. But why on earth should I be thinking about money-that was only incidental. The only pertinent question boiled down to this: "Was I or was I not a real Communist?" At that moment I was and was not. Working for the Uj Elore would provide the definite answer.
	"It's only for two months, comrade," coaxed Kovess, sensing my indecision. "A chance to turn into a real bolshevik."
I decided to give it a try for another two months.
185
L I 1J THE U) Elore was a Communist newspaper, which is quite different from the concept generally evoked by the term "newspaper." Its main function was not the dissemination of news but agitation and propaganda. Every item it published had to carry a strong Communist slant. The capitalists had to be portrayed as brutal subhumans and the proletarians as either akin to angels in virtue, or as cruelly wronged victims of the capitalist system.
	The editor was Lajos Bebrits, a tall imposing man weighing over two hundred pounds, with a friendly smile and deceptively shy academic manners. He was then just under forty, a former railroad official in Hungary, a revolutionary from his youth, who had fled jail to come to the United States.
	Bebrits was a man of encyclopedic knowledge who towered head and shoulders in intellect and character above everyone else in the Hungarian movement. He took an instant liking to me, the only friend I was to have on that staff.
	The news editor was John Nagy, his real name Joseph Gyetvay, a former Catholic priest defrocked for his revolutionary activities in Hungary. He was around forty; somewhat hunched from the habit of carrying one shoulder higher than the other with his neck held to one side, as if fearful of a blow. He was a secretive, humorless, uncommunicative man with a narrow sectarian outlook and rather limited mentality. To my surprise he was a writer of penny proletarian novels in which idealized but sterile housemaids were relentlessly pursued and cruelly forced to submit to the lust of depraved, sex-fiend aristocrats whose diet, bei86
cause of their wealth, consisted exclusively of caviar, roast pheasant and champagne, nutritionally a rather poor fare. (The last I heard, Gyetvay was in Ankara, the Hungarian ambassador to Turkey.)
	The third man on the staff was Emery Lustig, a young, broadshouldered soccer-football player who was esteemed an excellent organizer because of the effective way he was dealing with the Hungarian followers of Lovestone who refused to embrace the new Foster line. There was nothing subtle about his methods; he would invade a Lovestoneite meeting with his gang and break it up physically. (The last I heard he was district leader of an electrical workers' union allegedly still under Communist control somewhere in New York State.)
	The fourth man was John Santo, a member of the illegal Young Communist movement in Rumania before he came to the United States on a student visa. He had been working as a barber in Chicago before Nagy brought him to the U) Elore staff. (He was to rise to a high position in the government Meat Trust in Communist Hungary after having been deported from here.)
The U) Elore was a national daily with a circulation Of 50,000
from New York to California. Most of our copies went by mail to subscribers who would receive them anywhere from one to five days after publication. Under those circumstances it mattered very little whether the news in the U) Elore was printed one or even three days after the event occurred.
	Our favorite news source was the New York Times. The news we clipped had to have class interest and we would rewrite it to suit the policy of our paper. Of course all newspapers, capitalist or Communist, reflect the policy of the publisher. However, when it came to slanting the news we had no peers-even Time magazine was a novice by comparison. The Time staff had greater finesse because of the higher cultural level of their subscribers yet we had the edge on them because we were not handicapped by a feeling of delicacy among our readers. Where Time
187
magazine had to resort to some such mild adjective as "unkempt" to create a subtle prejudice against a labor organizer, we could bluntly call a capitalist "bloated," and if we wanted to please our readers even more, we would add "with the blood of workers."
	The two examples cited below should suffice to illustrate how we treated our news stories. Both items were clipped from the inside pages of the New York Times, recorded there in a few brief lines.
	The first reported an explosion in a coal mine in West Virginia in which two miners with garbled but unmistakably Hungarian names were killed, and three injured; it said that an investigation had been started to determine the cause of the accident. I was handed that news item to rewrite and did so carefully, correcting the spelling of the names of the victims, and then handed it to Nagy. After Nagy read it he snorted, gave me a withering glance, and retired with it to his desk. A short while later when reading proof on his version of that item, I had no doubt left in me about my "lack of political development."
The story carried a five-column headline.
BLOOD FEEDS COAL BARONS' GREED
It was subheaded:
COAL PROFITS DEMAND NEW HUMAN VICTIMS
A lower subhead proclaimed:
Fresh Orphans and Widows for Wall Street Molochs
	Wheeling, W. Va. The grinning death skulls of the Coal Barons, those blood brothers of the Wall Street imperialist finance capitalists, are again licking their greasy chops in glee. They have just fed anew on miners' flesh, on miners' steaming blood to satisfy their bloodbloated bellies. Those vampires chose for their latest victims two unfortunate Hungarian workers who had fled the brutal, torturing, Fascist hyenas of Horthy Hungary only to die in agony on the profit-slippery altars of American plutocracy.
1188
	The story then gave a bloodcurdling description of the explosion, of the scorching flames and choking fumes, gave precise details of how the two miners were mangled by the collapsing walls of the tunnels, and how the blast seared and injured many other miners who at that writing were on the verge of death, writhing in pain.
	Next it went into a denunciation of Wall Street, the coal barons, the Horthy government, charging them all with special responsibility for that disaster. The news story ended with a ringing appeal to all Hungarian miners to join the National Miners Union, under the leadership of the Communist Party, and subscribe to the U) Elore which could never be bought, nor intimidated, which alone told the truth!
	I congratulated Nagy on that story, praising his insight. He wasn't gracious in accepting my compliments. He implied that I could read Marx until doomsday and still fail to become a good Communist reporter; to write a good Communist news story one had to be part of the class struggle.
	The second story, that impressed me even more, had also been written by Nagy. It was based on a brief dispatch in the New York Times stating that the Budapest police had arrested three cabinetmakers for distributing Communist propaganda leaflets in their shop. Without giving any further details, the dispatch concluded by saying that the police were investigating the source of those leaflets.
The next day the U) Elore carried this eight-column headline:
THE HORTHY GOVERNMENT IS QUAKING!
It was subheaded:
SAVAGE REPRISALS, BLOODY POLICE TERROR FAIL TO PREVENT BOLD
COMMUNIST ACTION.

The lead went something like this:
	Terror struck today in the heart of the murderous, degenerate, bloodsucking ruling class of Hungary. Panicked by fear, they again
189
hid behind the shutters of their castles built with the blood of the destitute Hungarian workers and peasants. Once more they shriveled under the hot breath of revolt, heard the crowing of the red rooster setting flame to their rooftops. The proletariat of Hungary received new hope and courage from this fearless and bold action of the underground Communist Party which raised its red banner high to show that the time of the final reckoning is rapidly approaching.
	It was a three column long story, all based on that six-line news item in the New York Times. That was dialectical materialism in practice, a science that not only foretells the future but also divines the past. That couldn't be learned from books either, you had to live it to master it.
	Once I nearly came close to it. We were short of a filler for our Sunday supplement and I was handed a large glossy of a French movie actress on the Riviera wearing a fabulous halfmillion-dollar pearl necklace. I was asked to write an appropriate caption for it.
	It was quite a photo. Posed by a French photographer, the lady had laid bare practically all but her soul-the pearls were the least of her physical attractions. I sat gazing at that enticing figure for a long time trying to class-angle it. Finally I gave up, oblivious of my political inadequacy. Just for fun, to spoof that solemn Nagy, I wrote:
	X-Y, celebrated actress, favorite playmate of the parasitic scions of the ruthless oppressors of the French toilers, displaying her fabulous pearls worth $500,000, the cost of which has been squeezed out of the hide of the starving French masses.
	I was grinning when I handed it to Nagy. He didn't notice that. He read the caption carefully, reached for his pencil and made a few corrections.
He changed playmate to concubine, celebrated to notorious,
displaying to brazenly flaunting, raised the $500,000 to a million,
and stuck the adjective feudal in front of the noun oppressors.
Otherwise it had passed the test.
'9°
	Evidently I had acquired the secret yet I made little use of it. Every time I caught myself straying into that kind of Communist journalism I simply recalled those pearls, grinned, and stopped in time.
	Our fiction was clipped mostly from the German Communist newspapers-this was before Hitler. Once, tired of translating those dull and repetitious stories, I protested to Bebrits. In those German Communist epics the capitalists were invariably inhuman, cunning and cowardly monsters while the workers were all outspoken and self-sacrificing heroic demigods.
	I told Bebrits those conceptions were childish, that the true picture was quite the opposite. Most workers were far from being outspoken; in my personal experience they were a most easily intimidated lot. I proposed that I rewrite those stories, adding a touch of reality, thus making them more believable to the workers who could then see a closer resemblance to themselves.
	This was in the evening, after the paper had been put to bed and the two of us were left alone in the office.
	Bebrits sighed, stuck his pen wearily into his inkpot, stretched, and then leaned back in his chair.
	"You are an intelligent person," he addressed me mildly, "a man of culture, which is rare among our young Hungarian comrades. Yet you don't know about workers at all."
	I protested that immediately. I knew workers, I had worked in shops with them for eight years, I had eaten with them, stood in the fur market with them, I was on familiar terms with more workers than the rest of the U) Elore staff put together. In fact, I was the only genuine manual worker on the entire staff.
Bebrits heard me out and then replied.
	"You know individual workers, but not the working class. The average worker is a piece of turd, a cowardly, cunning, selfish, double-crossing, often moronic son of a bitch. He is deformed in body by toil and warped in mind, willing to betray his own grandmother. He is servile and fawns on his boss, ready to tuck '9'
in his wagging tail and run at the first harsh word from his master."
	I looked at Bebrits in astonishment. I would never have gone that far in my indictment. Bebrits continued, his eyes lost in contemplation.
	"I know what workers are like from way back when I was assistant railroad station master in Transylvania. Of course not all workers fit that description. I know workers from that famous railroad strike in Hungary during World War I that set Germany's Rumanian offensive back an entire week by stopping all troop movements.
	"What good would it do to the working class or to the Communist Party to depict the workers as they are, to hold a mirror up to them and say, 'Take a look at yourself and see what miserable crud you are!' The worker knows that better than we do, he would crawl back deeper into his dank crevice, even more hopeless, even more dejected and defeated.
	"What do we do? We paint him a picture which shows him a giant with the features of Apollo and the muscles of Hercules, brave as Mars and towering like Jupiter.
	"We keep presenting him with this picture and drumming into him: This is your portrait, this is the true mirror. All other mirrors are deceptive, they have always been deceptive, they were purposely so invented by the capitalists to reflect a distorted image in order to keep you humble and ignorant, to hide your real strength and character from you.
	"We keep drilling that into his head, we play up examples, we portray situations where the hero-and the hero is always the worker-performs the most prodigious feats of daring, until the worker starts rubbing his eyes, begins flexing his muscles and vaguely wonders if he isn't actually the kind of worker we insist he is, instead of the miserable wretch he knows himself to be.
"We give him self-confidence and some day, somewhere, the
192
occasion arises where he is put to test. He will inevitably be provoked by some exceptionally revolting act of capitalist injustice, some stupid act of suppression, some extremely cruel act of exploitation which capitalism by its very nature must historically invoke. He will then remember the countless examples we have cited him and, as likely as not, he will rise to the occasion. He will then discover that there is truth in what we have said, that by virtue of his overwhelming numerical superiority he is far stronger, more capable of revolutionary action than he has ever believed himself to be.
	"Even though he still has his own doubts about himself, he believes that the other workers with him are more of that heroic mold. Thus he gains strength from the presumed courage of his fellow workers and finds that mass courage really is superior, that ultimately it can sweep all resistance away.
	"This is why, comrade, you just go back and keep translating those fictional stories as they are published in those German magazines. The German Communist Party is the largest party outside of the Soviet Union. The German comrades know best how to transform that miserable wretch of a worker into a fighting revolutionary hero. In a few years you will see how that transformed German revolutionary worker will sweep the Krupps, the Junkers into the ash heap of history, how those German workers will plant the red banner of the successful proletarian revolution firmly in Europe for the rest of the nations to follow."
	I had no grounds to dispute the correctness of that theoretical foundation of Communist propaganda although I was of the opinion that Bebrits was far more contemptuous of the individual worker than the facts warranted. That conversation took place in the fall of 1929 and subsequent developments in Germany tended to bear out Bebrits' words concerning the psychology of the worker. However, actual events proved different in one basic essential from Bebrits' prophecy. Hitler and Goebbels, who took

'93
that line over from the Communists, proved greater masters in its application-they were the ones who convinced the German masses that they were the Herrenuolk whose superiority destined them to rule over all other nations-and it is now a matter of historical record that they nearly succeeded. But that was still in the future that evening. As our talk became more intimate I pressed Bebrits for the details of that railroad strike in Transylvania. He was at first reluctant but he yielded finally. As he went deeper into his story, he became more and more animated and I found myself transported back to the years of the First World War in Hungary.
	The Germans under Field Marshal von Mackensen were then concentrating for an all-out assault on Rumania to knock that country completely out of the war. The hub of all railroads from Germany to Rumania was Temesvâr, where Bebrits held a comparatively high post for a young man then in his twenties, that of Assistant to the Station Master. The railroad workers in that town had chosen that moment to demonstrate their antiwar sentiments and went on strike, bringing all rail traffic to a halt. The German High Command responded by arresting hundreds of railway workers, threatening to shoot all of them unless they resumed work. The railway workers held out. Mass executions were about to begin when suddenly Bebrits volunteered to take a hand. He was well liked and respected by all ranks and when he approached the higher railroad officials with his plan they were happy to recommend him to the German High Command.
	Bebrits offered to persuade the men to go back to work and start traffic moving under two conditions: that all death sentences be revoked and all other retaliatory measures be canceled. He also wanted permission to speak privately with the arrested men. Those requests were granted. The men returned to work and Bebrits took over.
	To the delight of the military, the most feverish activity in railroading history developed instantaneously right under their own

'94
eyes. Locomotives were getting up pressure, black smoke and white steam poured from the long-dormant funnels. Engines started puffing and snorting all along the tracks. Jets of hot white steam hissed round the elbow-shaped, shiny steel driving-shafts, punctuated by short penetrating toots of railroad whistles. Trains shunted back and forth, cars were coupled and uncoupled. Bumpers clashed, transmitting a shivery impact from car to car along the length of the trains-each car came alive with a shock when it received the rude jolt and passed along the momentum, snake-like, to the next car, to the delight of the military.
	The German Army Command was fascinated, that was railroading at its peak of perfection, the Christmas dream of a child come true. Semaphores flashed red, green, and yellow, their arms went up and down or halfway; brakemen signaled with their red flags by day, with the arcike movement of red lanterns by night. Every railroad man was at work, every car was in motion, the rails were hot with friction, the flashing wheels glimmered silvery by the light of the stars.
	It took days before the German Military Command discovered that with all that day-and-night feverish activity not a single train got through, that every southbound train was now facing north, that military units had been broken up and separated, that guns had been divorced from their ammunition and, worse still, every crossing, every switch was blocked by a long string of cars. It was the traffic jam of the century. The harder Bebrits worked the worse the tangle became.
	They called Bebrits on the carpet but they couldn't prove their suspicions. Bebrits had been working day and night without sleep, his eyes were bloodshot and circled, he was near the point of exhaustion. He had shouted himself hoarse and he could barely whisper his rebuttal that that was the way of railroading, that all the trains were in motion, that the men had kept their pledge and were carrying out all orders faithfully. Not having any tangible proof, the military had to let Bebrits go.

'95
j
It took four more days before the first train finally left for the Rumanian border. The news of that exploit spread like wildfire throughout the land, it sparked further antimilitary resistance. Bebrits was eventually jailed for sabotage but he wouldn't tell me about that part and I did not want to press him.
	That was the kind of revolutionary inspiration I had been looking for, it deepened my respect for the old-time revolutionary leaders. We discussed many topics that evening, points about Communism that bothered me, particularly dialectics and historical materialism. I questioned the accuracy of that supposedly scientific guide to the foretelling of the future development of history. My question was, what would happen to that theory after the establishment of Communism when the opposing class forces presumably disappeared
	Bebrits' eyes took on a dreamy look. He pondered the question and then replied that there would always be opposing forces. The struggle in society would then move on to a higher plane. A society then might clash over the kind of music to play, over the kind of poetry to write, whether to increase the population or to apply compulsory birth control, and so on. No society would ever be in full equilibrium, there would always be forces that clashed. But that was all in the future, something for our grandchildren to face.
	From that evening on, Bebrits and I became rather close, but our relationship was soon to be interrupted. Summoned to an inquiry into Communism by the Hamilton Fish Congressional Committee in 1930, Bebrits did not evoke the Fifth Amendment but attested his faith in Communism and was subsequently ordered deported. He went to the Soviet Union where he became a trouble-shooter in the reorganization of the Soviet railways. He wrote a few times at first; then I lost track of him.
	In the late fifties I came across a short feature story in an American magazine or newspaper describing a fully operating small-scale railroad with miles of tracks built by the Ministry of 196
Transport in Communist Hungary for the amusement of children near Budapest. The children had full rights to run the locomotives, to man the switches and signals by themselves and thus become educated in the ways of railroading. Even though that article did not identify the Minister of Transport by name until the very end I guessed who he was right from the start.
It was my friend Bebrits all right.
'97
28 1!:] SHORTLY after I went on the Uf Elore, Comrade Lustig disappeared. My query as to what happened to him met with a shrug of the shoulder meaning it was none of my business. It wasn't and I soon forgot about him although from then on I had to carry most of his work load also.
	My eight weeks were about up when Gus Mayer, Kovess' successor, called me in. He was a former blacksmith from Indiana, built like a bear; he gave the impression of massive strength and unshakable proletarian conviction and sincerity behind his rough manners. He asked, rather told me, that I was an American citizen, wasn't I? When I affirmed that, he growled:
"Go and get packed. You're leaving for Canada."
	Before I had a chance to recover, Mayer outlined the situation. The Canadian Hungarian revolutionary movement had been organized three years previously by the American Hungarian Bureau. Within that short period of time the Canadian movement had grown to the point where it had started a weekly paper of its own. However, the Canadian Hungarians were mostly semiliterate peasants and they depended for top leadership and for editing their paper on comrades sent from United States. That's where Lustig was now. He was due to be relieved but the comrade sent to replace him, not being a citizen, had been turned back at the Canadian border, as was the second man sent after him. Lustig, who was a family man and eager to return, reported that he had reorganized the Canadian movement and it now had a firm leadership of its own. He proposed that I be 198
sent to replace him; I was sufficiently qualified to edit their paper and that was all that was expected of me; the newly reorganized Canadian Bureau was strong enough to provide me with political leadership.
	I protested immediately. All I had promised Kovess was that I'd help out the U) Elore for two months and my time was up. I was quitting that Saturday.
	"No, you won't!" Mayer banged on the table. "It is a party decision. You'll go to Canada or we'll expel you from the party and publicly expose you!"
	"Go ahead!" I was mad. "You can start right now!" I headed for the door.
	Mayer's attitude changed abruptly. He told me about those poor peasants lost in Canada without leadership, the prey of any Hungarian reactionary who might happen along. He accused me of being one of those bleeding hearts who cry over the plight of the ignorant, exploited masses but who wouldn't lift a linger to better their lot. He reminded me of some of the lectures I gave on evolution and on the origin of Christianity before Hungarian clubs and how well they were received-what right did I have to deny those peasants in Canada, so eager for the knowledge withheld from them by the feudal landlords of Hungary, to understand the world in which they live. Besides, it would be for two months only. That was my opportunity to live among the masses, among the proletarians, the real dispossessed, to learn from them and become a seasoned revolutionary.
I was tempted.
"For two months, did you say?"
	"Yes, two months. This is a promise," he added solemnly. "I won't let you down. Any time you need any kind of assistance, money, just write me. I want you to take the train tonight."
I did not take the train that night, I left the day after. Mayer
gave me twenty dollars for my fare and expenses, which mci-

'99
dentally came to more than one hundred dollars. I had to buy a trunk and other travel gear; the Pullman ticket alone cost more than the twenty I had received from Mayer.
	I turned my apartment over to Kovess who had asked for the use of it, promising he would take good care of it in my absence.
	By the time I was relieved by the Bureau and returned from Canada, nine months later, my apartment was long gonefurnishings, books, and all.
	I learned many things in that nine-month interval. The most important lesson, however, still eluded me.
	A Communist promise binds only those to whom it is given, but it is never binding on the Communist leaders themselves.
200
29 i TAKING a Pullman to Canada instead of a coach as
was expected from a Party functionary, was my own idea. It proved to have been a sound one even though the difference came out of my own pocketbook. I had no difficulty at the border. When the Canadian immigration officials woke me before dawn, the winter sky-gray and streaked with smoke from the engineappeared grim, inhospitable and forbidding. I was sleepy and yawned-they asked very few questions. All they were interested in was how long I intended to stay, was I an American citizen, and how much money I had.
	I replied I intended to stay a few months, was a naturalized citizen, and had enough money for my needs. They did not ask me to show them my citizenship papers but they wanted to see my money. It was then December, 1929. Unemployment was steadily increasing and although no one as yet suspected that unemployment would soon rise to crisis proportions, officialdom was already worrying. Before my departure I had closed out my checking account and had a thousand dollars in travelers checks and a few hundred dollars in cash on me. I showed them that, which ended the inspection.
	I entered legally, had answered all questions truthfully, violated no law.
	When a few months later the drive to deport alien Communists from Canada panicked quite a few comrades, the consciousness that I hadn't violated any law enabled me to stand 201
my post calmly without the furtiveness which draws suspicion and leads to denunciation. Nor was I molested.
	I reached my destination, Hamilton in Ontario, early Friday morning. No one met me at the station. I left my trunk in the baggage room and took a taxi to the editorial offices of the Kanadai Magyar Munkas (Hungarian Canadian Worker). The taxi took me to a side street in the working class section and stopped in front of a residential building. I was apprehensive that the driver had stopped at the wrong address but I did not want to arouse his suspicions and got out. There seemed to be no life in the house, even the street looked deserted. I was about to walk up the stoop when I discovered an open concrete stairway leading to the basement. I walked down to inquire from the janitor, or whoever would be there. The steps led to a door with a glass panel over which a window shade had been drawn. Tacked on the door was a printed news strip yellowed with exposure, the masthead of the Kanadai Magyar Munkas (from here on to be referred to as Worker to make it easier for the reader).
	I tried the door, it was locked. I somehow sensed there was life behind and knocked. The door was soon opened by a sleepyeyed man in his shirtsleeves who had evidently been sleeping on the leather couch under the window. He was rubbing his eyes and for some reason looked embarrassed. I asked him where Comrade Lustig lived-I cannot now recall the party name he used in Canada.
	The man didn't know but said Lustig usually came in around ten. He then asked me whether I was the new comrade they were expecting. When I told him I was he started to apologize for sleeping in the office; he had been dispossessed and he hoped to be taken in soon by some of his buddies.
	The editorial office of the Worker, for that's what that basement was, had only one window the top of which was level with the sidewalk, affording no other view than an occasional dog or the legs of the passers-by. It was lighted by two large
unshaded electric bulbs; whitewash on the damp walls was flaky and green in patches. The center of the room was taken up by a crudely nailed, twelve foot table with two benches made of unpainted, roughly planed fir. That, with the leather couch, some crude shelving made of discarded orange crates, and a number of folding chairs, comprised all the furniture. There was no desk, typewriter, filing cabinet-there was nothing in that room to indicate even remotely that it was an editorial office except perhaps the disarranged pile of Workers stacked in one corner.
	I tucked a copy of the Worker in my pocket and told the comrade I was going out for a walk and breakfast; if Lustig arrived before I returned let him wait for me.
Hamilton was the second-largest city after Toronto in the
province of Ontario, with a population of a little over 150,000
in 1929, a drab industrial town. As I walked down one dreary street after another shivering under the icy blasts of the arctic Canadian winter winds, my spirit sank. This was proletarian life all right, the life I had chosen, but now that I was face to face with it, I felt myself shrinking inside. I was both angry with me and feeling sorry for myself. I thought of Lee and Swannee, of Helen and Ruth, of my snug apartment with my collection of records and the oversize bed. What the hell was I doing here in a basement in Canada, messing around with the proletariat! I cursed myself for a romantic fool as I walked into a lunchroom, glowering over the Worker as I waited for my order.
	The Worker was a lousy sheet, full of typographical errors; it consisted entirely of reprints clipped from the U) Elore and from Hungarian publications in Moscow and Paris. The only items identifying it as a Canadian publication were a few puffs about bazaars and affairs for the benefit of the Worker. Comrade Lustig hadn't exerted himself in editing that paper, that was sure.
	The lunchroom was agreeably warm, the hotcakes were fluffy, the bacon crisp, and the coffee strong-emotion was receding
202		203
before reason. The life of a pioneer was always one of hardship, the fathers of the American Revolution did not whore away their time in bed. History was not made by weak sybarites. What the hell was I bitching about? I had to be ready to make sacrifices. The sun was also coming out; feebly as it shone, it still radiated light and heat. As I retraced my steps to the Worker I was definitely in a confident mood.
	I entered without knocking this time. The room was crowded and the air was hazy with tobacco smoke. My nose was assailed by a heavy sourish smell, a mixture of dried sweat from unwashed bodies, seldom changed underwear and dirty socks, the reek of old boots and the only suit that is being lived in, the penetrating odor of garlic mingled with cheap hair oil-the "peasant smell" they called it in Hungary. It was the universal smell of the poor that always hits you when you enter the cramped quarters of the underprivileged-whether in a Mission House or a tenement-the smell of humans who are overcrowded, who have neither the sanitary facilities nor the necessary change of clothes to keep themselves fresh and clean. Poverty stinks everywhere, and so do the poor.
	I paused inside the door to get my bearings. I saw Lustig there surrounded by a crowd of men with typical Hungarian faces. Lustig greeted me with a handshake and with what almost passed for a smile of welcome-that was about the friendliest he had ever acted toward me. He then introduced me to the comrades as Kalman Lakatos, my party name in Canada. He did not introduce them to me individually and I felt like a man visiting distant relatives for the first time, who is being slyly appraised by all, and who in turn is trying to puzzle out what his relationship to each may be.
	The comrades were deferential in a friendly way, they asked me questions, primarily about the UJ Elore, but also about the Hungarian movement in America in general. I was able to answer the first but had to parry the second because I was fairly

204
ignorant about the movement outside New York. Luckily, as their questions showed, they weren't much better informed either and I passed the test.
	About a half hour later Lustig pulled out his watch and announced he had to leave at once if he were to catch the train back to New York.
	This was contrary to what I had been told to expect. Lustig was supposed to stay with me for at least two weeks until I became familiar with my duties. More important still, he was to take me to the Central Committee of the Canadian Communist Party and ask them to provide me with close guidance and (this is what Mayer emphasized most) with a subsidy for the Worker from the secret press funds of the Comintern. Now Lustig was pulling out, leaving me stranded like a blind owl in a strange belfry.
	"Just a minute, Comrade Lustig. You haven't told me a thing about the paper, you haven't taken me to the print shop, I am not even acquainted with these comrades here. There are many problems we will have to discuss before you leave." I kept my voice low and tried to keep the edge out of it, but we were in an open room, all present had heard me, and now they faced us in silence. It looked like the beginning of a row and they were all aware of it, Lustig particularly so. He did not reply to me directly, he addressed us at large.
	"Comrade Lakatos does not know the great organizational progress we have achieved during my short stay here. I am proud of the Canadian Hungarian movement!" He said that with a flourish and flashed us a wide oratorical smile which, I noticed, met with feeble response. Then turning to me, he related how he had reorganized the entire movement, how well the Canadian Hungarian Bureau was now functioning, how he had appointed Comrade Kovacs, a slender young man of about twenty-four, a tool and die maker apprentice, business manager of the Worker. He further informed me that there was more than enough copy

205
in the hands of the printer for the next issue, leaving me a full week to get acquainted.
	Next he turned to Kovacs and asked him how much money the Worker had. Kovacs emptied his pockets, counted the contents including the small change, and announced it was twentynine dollars and some pennies. Lustig then took twenty-five dollars out of that pile to pay for his room and his fare back to New York, shook hands with everyone there, including me, and left. Dismayed as I was, I couldn't help noticing that there was a singular lack of warmth in those handshakes, that not a single comrade bothered to see him to the door.
	The next afternoon, I stopped at the print shop and found Lustig had misinformed me. Far from having an abundance of copy, the next issue of the Worker was two full pages short.
	A Bureau meeting had been scheduled for that night in the Worker's office. Twelve comrades were present and while I was waiting for them to open the meeting I occupied myself writing copy, all-Canadian news for a change, clipped from the Toronto papers. Finally I asked them why they delayed calling the meeting to order. A short discussion made it clear they expected me to do that, the comrade sent in from the States had always been the Secretary of the Bureau and the leader of the Canadian Hungarian movement.
	The following night I attended a meeting of the Workers Singing Society; I wanted to see how one of our mass organizations functioned. Out of the fourteen singers in that chorus, eleven were familiar to me-they were the members of the Bureau.
	The next night I went to the meeting of the Workers Dramatic Club. I found nine actors there, all of them members of the Bureau.
	I was also asked to attend the meeting of the International Labor Defense but by then I was suspicious enough to ask who the members were. My hunch proved correct. They also had a

206
Hungarian branch of the Workers International Relief organized -all Bureau members. The comrades were also talking about organizing a Workers Soccer Football Club-they had just the right number of prospects for it-eleven members of the Bureau for the team and the twelfth member for a substitute. Those comrades were certainly well organized.
	At that time I blamed Lustig for the situation. It did not take me long to learn that this was typical Communist organizational practice. Many Communist organizations existed only on paper, their active membership consisted of the same pitifully small number of party members. This explains why the same names keep turning up on dozens of membership rolls on the list of designated subversive organizations.
	In less than two weeks I had to face up to the truth-there was no Hungarian workers movement in Canada except in a very loose sense. The movement was actually in its infancy and it fell on me to chart its course, although I myself lacked previous organizational experience. As it happened, this ignorance proved more of an asset than a handicap; it enabled me to develop my own methods along pragmatic lines and they worked out far better than those of Lustig's mechanical party procedures.
207
F
A
30 1J INFLUENCED by the utterances of the late Senator McCarthy and similar professional patriots, most Americansespecially the younger generation brought up on lurid television programs and the fanciful accounts of self-confessed Communist spies-have been conditioned to think of the Communist Party as a wickedly cunning and devilishly efficient organization disposing of an inexhaustible war chest and commanding a vast army of fanatic professionals trained to a razor-sharp edge in every trickery to ensnare the ignorant masses. That was not my experience in Canada. Before my first week was up I found myself enmeshed in problems stemming from the utter poverty and ineptness of the Communist movement. Worse still, as I discovered to my dismay, the comrades around me not only blithely assumed that, as the editor of the Worker and therefore the leader of the Hungarian movement, it was my responsibility to solve those problems, they also took it for granted that I had the training and the experience to cope with them.
	The first problem I had to face was that the Worker had no funds and the print shop refused to extend credit unless we settled the old bills piled up by Lustig. I solved that by paying them out of my own pocket.
	Next there was the problem of the party fractions-where they were, what they were doing, just how many Hungarian party members there actually were in Canada. It soon transpired that there were less than a dozen, not even the members of the Bureau were all members of the party. The people hanging around
208
the Worker-usually more than a dozen, they came and went with new faces showing up all the time-called each other comrades, considered themselves Communists, but were not actually members of the party. Outside of a few men like Kovacs they had no contact with the Canadian party whatever.
	I decided to change all that. Whoever came to see me from then on was asked to sign up. Most of the Hungarians in Canada then were migratory workers, riding the freight trains from one end of the provinces to another in that vast country in search of jobs-digging coal for a few months in Alberta, working on some farm in Saskatchewan, turning up afterward in New Brunswick or Nova Scotia to cut pulpwood for the paper mills. They would make the Worker their headquarters between jumps, and in a few weeks I not only made friends with a sizeable number of them but also signed them up in the party, assigned them responsibilities within the limits of their abilities such as recruiting other party members in their camps, and to support the Worker in an organized manner. From the reports they sent me it soon became clear that no matter in what remote logging camp these men happened to land, the Red Flag soon became a topic of most intense discussion.
	But it wasn't at all easy; it took immense effort that kept me on the go all the time with barely time to sleep. I needed help and advice badly and wrote to Mayer repeatedly about it; he didn't even reply. Finally I decided to contact the Canadian party leadership and call on them for help and political guidance.
209
'1
31 C1 COMRADE Resnick, the local party leader, was a cheerful little man in his late forties; he ran an alteration tailor shop. When I introduced myself he greeted me most effusively. He was happy to welcome me, the Local Executive Committee of the party was having a meeting in his shop that evening, would I care to attend? That was a greater stroke of luck than I had anticipated. Now I could lay my problems before a high body of seasoned revolutionary leaders and the very name "Local Executive Committee of the Communist Party of Hamilton, Ontario, Canada" awed me. A customer came in just then with a pair of pants to be pressed and I left, promising to return that night.
	There were six people in the rear of Comrade Resnick's shop when I arrived. Comrade Resnick introduced me proudly as "a leading comrade from the States, the Editor of the Worker, and the leader of the Canadian Hungarian Movement." The comrades greeted me with a deference which I found disturbing.
	My uneasiness increased when Comrade Resnick announced that the L.E.C. (Local Executive Committee) was grateful for the presence of such a leading comrade in Hamilton who could greatly help them in doing more effective party work. He moved that I be drafted to become a member of the Local Executive Committee and before I had a chance to protest, I found myself duly elected.
	As the meeting progressed, I was asked my opinion on every point on the agenda. I did not know the City of Hamilton, I 210
wasn't much interested in their problems, my mind was on my own. I did not participate in the discussion for I was only half listening and when pressed for my opinion I gave it only after all of them had had their say. I did not know then that that was the formula employed by all party leaders; as a result all my opinions were approved.
	As the meeting progressed it became clear I couldn't expect any guidance from that group, they were taking their leadership from me, an utter tyro.
	The main topic of the meeting was an unemployed demonstration, the first to be held in Hamilton. Unemployment was growing rapidly in Canada and industrial centers like Hamilton were the hardest hit. They had been promised a speaker from the Central Committee in Toronto, now the problem was, how to reach the unemployed and induce them to turn out. They were planning to mimeograph five thousand leaflets, a ridiculously small number, I thought. Further discussion established that they had a problem distributing even that number because of the 36 comrades on the membership roll less than half were "active."
	I proposed to print 5,000 additional leaflets and to distribute them with the aid of my Hungarians. I also suggested that we notify the local newspapers about the demonstration, thus giving it added publicity, and I volunteered for that task. Both proposals were met by admiring comments. They must have thought me a wizard of an organizer ....
	The demonstration fell on a very cold winter day. The unemployed were shabby and poorly clad, they were miserable and shivered in the icy wind. Ten o'clock passed, then ten-fifteen, the speaker from Toronto still hadn't arrived. The crowd was growing impatient, even I was beginning to feel the cold. After a while I told Comrade Resnick to forget about the Toronto speaker and start or the crowd would disintegrate. To my utter amazement he then proposed that I speak, taking for granted that I was an experienced speaker. Before I half knew what was

211
happening, they boosted me to an empty steel drum amidst stormy applause.
	I was utterly confused. The barrel had a sprung bottom, it teetered precariously under my weight, and my mind was concentrating more on how to keep from falling off than on what I was supposed to say. The applause ended, hundreds of pairs of eyes were fixed on me expectantly, the crowd moved closer and so did the Canadian bobbies. I had no choice, I had to speak. But say what? I remembered the text of our leaflet and started off with that, trying to think ahead while I was talking. The crowd received it well, applauding the slogans calling for relief measures and unemployment insurance. That was good as far as it went, but it was over too fast-I had to keep talking. I remembered my early days of unemployment and hunger and went into a description of that episode, reliving it as I talked, embellishing it as I went along. It went over well. Finally I noticed a commotion around the members of the L.E.C. and saw a stranger talking with them, he must be the Toronto speaker we were expecting. I cut my speech short and breathed a sigh of great relief as I dismounted and felt solid ground under my feet again. I had spoken in public, in English, to a strange audience, in a foreign country from a bobbing barrel, starting off a demonstration. There was nothing to it.
	Of the many comments I received on that maiden speech of mine, two stand out in my mind. One comrade wanted to know why I had been facing only one part of the audience; why hadn't I rotated from left to right taking in all the audience like other speakers, instead of merely rocking back and forth, and facing but a single segment of the listeners. Frankly, that had never occurred to me. Evidently there were techniques to public speaking other than merely bellowing words at the top of one's lungs.
	The other remark was intended as a high compliment but I fail to consider it as such even to the present day. It was uttered

212
by one of the Hungarian comrades in the group who came up to me proudly to congratulate me.
	"You know, comrade," he said, "we have listened to speeches in English before, but we couldn't understand them. But when you spoke we understood every single word you said."
The others chimed in enthusiastically and one of them added:
	"I never knew I understood English so well until I heard you speak this morning!" I was sorely troubled in consequence, wondering how many non-Hungarians in that crowd, if any, had understood my heavily accented English.
	Be that as it may, we succeeded in organizing an Unemployment Council as a result of that demonstration. Later on we held other demonstrations and additional Councils were organized.
	It was all started by that Local Executive Committee of six members, by a total membership of 36 Communists in that town of 150,000. In other towns throughout Canada other inept Communists of similarly insignificant numbers did likewise and the influence of the party grew rapidly among the unemployed.
213
32 1 My life in Canada soon settled into the routine of a party organizer in a more or less virgin field-differing from that of a missionary mainly in that the faith we preached was redemption through joining one of our organizations and salvation through revolution, through the overthrow of the capitalist system right here on earth. I tended my flock, made new converts, brought them to a closer understanding of life and society by lecturing on such subjects as evolution and the class structure of society, all strictly according to the gospel of Marx and Lenin. My congregation consisted mostly of peasants who had broken with their old church and came to look upon Communism as a new religion, on the editor of the Worker as not only their spiritual but their lay leader as well, bringing to him their personal problems as well as their disputes, and abiding by his authority. I was even called upon to deliver funeral orations in which I was expected to console the bereaved by extolling the virtues of the departed not only as a good family man but also as an outstanding example of a class conscious workingman. I was invited to name the newly born and I still take credit for naming none of them Vladimir after Lenin or Krupskaya after his widow.
	The one incident that was anything but routine occurred at our May Day demonstration in Hamilton in 1930 and the memory of the part I played in it still makes me uneasy.
	It all began when the party selected me chairman of the United May Day Committee which was formed to organize the demon-

214
stration. By that time I had become accustomed to leadership. At our first meeting all went well and in harmony until a nonparty delegate raised the question of applying for a police permit. The delegates seemed in general agreement on the advisability of that-I alone stood in opposition. I reasoned that the police had shown increased apprehension of late over our growing activities, particularly among the unemployed, and by risking the denial of a permit we would be playing right into their hands. That would give them a pretext for smashing our demonstration and on top of this, to charge us with provoking a riot by willful violation of the police ban.
	Leadership is a heady wine. One gets used to power just as easily as to having money enough to burn, without giving it a thought. Since the majority opinion seemed to be definitely against me I used the chair's prerogative. I asked for someone to move that we should not apply for a police permit. Some comrade mumbled something to that effect; I called for seconding, some other comrade did so. I then immediately called for a voice vote and when a few comrades said "aye," pronounced the motion carried.
	At our next meeting one of the delegates made a peculiar report. He claimed that he had been approached by a police captain who objected to our announced route. Our plan called for marching up one main avenue and then turning right on the most important thoroughfare in the city. The police wanted us to turn left at that crossing to avoid traffic being paralyzed.
	His report caused considerable agitation but I quickly ruled out all discussion of it. The way I interpreted it, that was merely a request to make things more convenient for the police. After all, we did want to tie up traffic; the worse the traffic jam, the greater the impression we'd make on the bourgeoisie.
	At our final meeting a few days before May first, another delegate, this time the President of the Veterans' Unemployment Council, came in with a still graver report. He had been called

215
in by the Police Chief himself and warned that under no condition would the police allow us to turn right on the main avenue. If we turned left, they would leave us alone. But if we turned right they would await us with machine guns and we would then be held responsible for whatever ensued.
	This threat couldn't be ignored. A number of delegates asked for the floor at once, including two members of the Local Executive Committee of the Party. To be democratic I recognized a delegate of one of the Unemployment Councils first-besides, I wanted to know how he felt. He spoke for changing the route, arguing that what we were primarily interested in was a demonstration, not a bloody clash with the police. He spoke with heat and it made good sense to me. The majority seemed to agree with him.
	After a few other delegates spoke in a similar vein, I finally recognized one of the official Communist Party delegates, one of the members of our Local Executive Committee.
	He was vehement. May Day was a day for "militant" demonstration. The workers themselves would decide where and how they wanted to demonstrate. The route of the demonstration had already been publicized, binding us to our plan. If the police interfered, the responsibility would rest squarely on them, and on the capitalist government!
	After he spoke the other party members became silent. They did not approve of his stand, but the party had spoken and that settled it for them. It settled it for me too, although I did not like it either. That police threat might well have been a bluff, to scare us out of tying up traffic at that key corner. On the other hand, the threat of machine guns might not be an idle one in view of the growing nervousness of the city authorities. But the party had spoken, I was the chairman, it was my task to put its decision into execution. After the motion to leave our route of march unchanged had been carried, although with a notable

216
lack of enthusiasm, I decided I might as well put the best face on it.
	"If the Police Chief approaches any one of you delegates again, simply tell him we'll march as announced, that we'll turn to the right even if they face us with cannons. The streets belong to the people. The working class of Hamilton will assert its right to demonstrate peacefully even though that may inconvenience the bourgeoisie."
	That speech was met by great applause and it restored the confidence of all delegates except mine. Inwardly I felt that our stand was wrong. The real issue was not whether the police were provoking us or we were provoking the police, but that a good number of people might be gravely hurt. The party had egged me on, I egged the party on! They had committed me, I had committed them. Leadership meant responsibility-come what may, I would have to face it.
	May Day broke sunny and beautiful. The profusion of red flags and banners put the crowd at the assembly point in a festive mood. Both sidewalks were jammed with onlookers-those prudent comrades who were one with us in spirit but who nevertheless considered it wiser to separate their bodies from the common cause.
	It took quite a while to line up the column in the most colorful and yet, if attacked, the most effective position for defense. There were a considerable number of women and children among the marchers and to protect them we concentrated the huskiest men on the flanks so that from there they could rush quickly into the fighting. The plan called for me to march in the lead with one member of the United May Day Committee on my right and another on my left.
We started our march on schedule, singing the Internationale,
and shouting slogans at intervals. The crowds on the sidewalks kept step with our progress, people waved to us from the win-
217
dows, the sun shone bright and warm-it was an exhilarating demonstration.
	As we neared the contested intersection I subconsciously slowed down which must have affected the spirit of the crowd. The singing died down and this in turn reacted on me. I felt my feet dragging and when we reached the crossing the column came to a slow halt.
	The street left of the intersection lay clear of all traffic. The crossing to the right was blocked curb to curb by a line of motorcycles. Two policemen in full battle dress manned each motorcycle, the driver leaning forward, one foot on the pedal in readiness. The other in the gondola slouched low in the unmistakable posture of a machine gunner ready for instant action. A police captain, feet planted apart, was facing us in the center of the road.
	The marchers were moving up closer. There was a momentum to that column-it was physically pressing me on. I felt the eyes of the comrades boring into my back. The Communist Party was leading that demonstration. I was the picked leader of the party.
	To the left the street stretched open and enticing. It beckoned: "This way to joy and peace!"
	To the right the police line was tensing. That way lay fire, flame, and bullets-the road to destruction.
	It was my responsibility to the party, it was my decision to make. I made it.
	I raised my right arm and shouted loud and clear: "Lo-o-ng li-i-lye the .coli-i-da-a-a-arity of the interna-a-ational working ciaa-a-ss!"
	"Long live the solidarity of the international working class," the shout thundered back from the crowd.
	"Long live May Day!" I shouted, and brought my arm down decisively, pointing firm and straight to the right, to the police line ahead. I executed a sharp right turn and marched resolutely ahead, the column following in my wake.
21 8
	I was marching on stiffly. One ... two ... three ... I drew my shoulders back ... Four ... five ... six . . . A few more steps and the police would open fire! The Police Captain raised his arm in a signal and shouted a command. Here it comes! I marched grimly on. One . . . two ... three ... The motorcycles came alive with a roar ... Four ... five ... They are heading into us ... Six ... They are going to ride us down Seven . . . I threw my chest out. Shoot, you bastards, shoot! Yes ... No ... ! Yes ... ! The motorcycles parted into two, the road was no longer blocked, the motorcycles were pulling over to the curb to let our column pass.
An immense cheer rose and the column broke into the Inter-
nationale, we marched victoriously on, shouting and singing, and I changed my stride from parade step to route. I looked backeveryone was happy and triumphant. I was not elated, I felt remote and detached as I kept marching on.
	That evening, at the May Day dance and celebration, I was listless. I shook hands, accepted congratulations, answered the small talk, but my attention was not there, my mind was hovering over a vast empty space with no landmarks on which to alight. I excused myself early, went home and to bed. I was curiously exhausted, but I couldn't sleep and couldn't read-the page blurred in front of my eyes. I turned off the light and closed my eyes. Sleep wouldn't come. Suddenly the sky lit up and there was that police motorcycle line right in frOnt of my eyes, the column in back of me pressing me on, and I was out in front, the decision resting with me.
	I watched the motorcycles roar to life and suddenly I saw those machine guns spitting fire, heard the screaming of the comrades, saw men, women, and children crumpled up on the pavement, moaning in pain. I was responsible for all that; it had not happened that way, yet my action could very well have resulted in such a massacre!
I tried to twist and turn out of it, I argued with that phantas-

219
magoria but it wouldn't dissolve. That was not leadership, that was not responsibility to the masses, that was an out-and-out provocation. I, the party leader, had deliberately disregarded the possible consequences, had led the workers to be massacred-to uphold what? A party decision and my position of leadership. But for the mercy of that police captain, many of those workers would now be lying in blood, screaming in agony, those women and children, too-all for the glory of the Communist Party!
I shook and shivered until sleep brought oblivion.
220
-,,,
33 LJ WHEN I returned from Canada after an absence of nearly nine months, early in September 1930, I found a vast change. I had expected a change-1 had kept in touch with events at home by reading both party and nonparty American newspapers, magazines, other publications. Visual contact now reinforced the mental image I had formed in Canada and charged it with emotional content-we, the party, were being proved right! Capitalism was on the downgrade and was sliding rapidly into an abyss.
	The appearance of the City of New York seemed to have altered. Not only the city had changed but also the eyes with which I was viewing it. My experiences in Canada had made me more perceptive; my eyes had learned to pick out highlights; my mind had become trained in the "political approach"-to consider most manifestations of life from the point of view of the "class struggle."
	Physically New York looked shabby, dirtier, run-down. The former infectious gayety, the determined rush, the purposeful hurry was missing from the stride of the pedestrians-the spirit of the people seemed to be running down.
	I still detected the pushing and the shoving, the rudeness of manners, that stone-cold indifference and self-centered concentration of the New Yorker which seems to say, "I'll have to look out for myself, no one else will." Yet there was an evidence of mellowing manifested in the warmer sympathy afforded to the unemployed apple sellers, to the long lines of dispossesed 221
queuing up in front of the many soup kitchens. The eyes of the passers-by had lost their former self-assured look-they reflected the same uncertainty, the self-doubt-the haunting feel of insecurity I had come to recognize so well in Canada.
	When I left New York, the visible trouble had been mainly at the top. The big capitalists, the big exploiters were then the ones who had been reeling under the shock of the Stock Exchange crash. They were the ones who were losing their shirts, jumping out of office windows, putting guns to their temples, taking an overdose of sleeping pills. The causes and consequences of that stock market crash were now affecting the masses. Mills, mines, factories were shutting down one after another and bleak unemployment was spreading its paralyzing grip deep and wide all over the land.
	The party had shrilly predicted the coming collapse months before the market crash. Now as our dogma began to prove itself we were convinced that we were the true prophets chosen to carry the sword of Red Islam, even though our muscles were thin and our ranks were sparse. We felt it was our destiny to face up to a task imposed on us by history, and if we were found lacking we would fail history.
	The battle for the streets of New York was on. The police were brutal and savage. The official policy was, "Suppress the symptoms of distress; choke the cry for relief back into the throats of the hungry; banish the bastards from the streets; prevent the starving from exhibiting their sores in public-and this crisis will pass, we hope it will pass, Christ, it's gotta pass, we gotta show those bums who is the boss!"
	In retrospect, at this writing when our national income is runfling at more than 500 billion annually, when we enjoy a standard of living unprecedented in history and any criticism of the free enterprise system is considered subversive, it seems ironic to record in how cowardly a fashion capitalism behaved less than three decades ago, how little faith the capitalists themselves had

222
in the survival of their own system, in the validity of their own thinking. Instead of asserting faith and leadership, they squirmed, twisted and turned; instead of thinking and planning they struck out blindly. Unable to fathom the mysteries of their own economic system, the capitalists resorted to incantation and black magic; they invoked suppression, praying that the lid would stay clamped down.
	The seat of the tumor was in the United States and the malignant growth was spreading all over the globe-except for one sixth of the earth.
	The eyes of the world-except for those whose gaze was fixed on the rising star in the East-were fastened on the United States where the High Priests of Capitalism reigned. The world turned to them in supplication but the eyes of those High Priests were glazed.
	The High Priests were basically little men. They had not been trained to think in terms of human society. They had been encouraged to grab; to stake out claims; to gather in and to hoard; to ride roughshod over everyone who stood in their way to the glimmering harvest. They had been brought up in a one-way street ruled by "heads I win and tails you lose." Now they found the one-way road had become a dead-end street where the once reliable coin wouldn't perform and even the "heads" lost, and they sat down in confusion.
	The High Priests had their Supreme Priest presiding over the nation, the symbol of human genius at its apex, begotten out of the political wedlock of engineering and big business. But they knew his feet were also made of clay and heeded not his admonitions.
The Supreme Priest invoked the old magic chant.
"Prosperity is right around the corner!" he intoned.
	Prosperity failed to respond to blandishments. It regressed further.
The Supreme Priest called a conclave in Washington.

223
	The High Priests all responded and officiated in the rituals of exorcising the Devil. They solemnly pledged to cease being frightened, to stop further layoffs, to start rehiring, and to resume normal production. No sooner had they left the White House than the High Priests rushed to their long-distance phones and called their plant managers. As long as the other fellow was hiring that was a good time to sneak in a rabbit punch, to take a bit of advantage. The workers lining up in front of the hiring gates with the folded newspapers in their hip pockets headlining the happy news were met by a flood of men streaming back, those who had been freshly fired that morning.
	The Supreme Priest preached the return to the good life, to thrift and austerity.
	To set the example he cut the government budget. The haves responded promptly by grimly clutching their belongings and by hoarding even tighter.
	"Waste not, want not," they chanted, and cut back their buying, sending production into a further tailspin.
	The have-nots clenched their empty palms into fists, yet stood by in dazed helplessness.
The Supreme Priest invoked moral suasion.
	"The American people are too proud to accept the dole," he proclaimed from the depth of his Quaker soul.
	"Those bums are starving because they are lazy. They don't want to work. Anybody who wants to work can find a job," recited the righteous haves, turning a stone heart to charity as being a violation of moral precepts. For has it not been written that the wastrels are committing an offense against God?
	With sermons on their lips and clubs in their hands, the High Priests of capitalism staggered around, preaching they did not know what, laying about in blind fury, in the faint hope that if they succeeded in stifling the screams the epidemic itself would pass. Yet their very own lips trembled, the hands that gripped the clubs shook with palsy. They feared those forces around them

224
which they had once proudly claimed to have mastered. Their ships unaccountably foundered, the Captains of Destiny now found themselves bouncing about in fragile walnut shells. They were no longer steaming toward a goal, but merely bailing in blind desperation, praying for survival.
	It is appalling to contemplate how quickly these High Priests of Capitalism, these Captains of Industry, began to doubt the basic soundness of their own productive system, how little they understood the economic laws that govern production and distribution, and determine the prosperity of a highly industrialized capitalist society.
	To me the most outstanding fact, the most amazing social phenomenon in that dark early era of depression is that deep in their hearts the capitalist leaders themselves had lost faith in their own system. They found themselves on a toboggan and could picture themselves only as going down. They lacked the imagination to find new ways of getting off the slide and they gave up hope of coming up. They concentrated their energies on digging in their heels to slow down their rapid descent.
	Single out one capitalist leader, one important captain of industry, cite one outstanding capitalist economist, if you can, who dared proclaim:
	"These are not symptoms of decay, these are growing pains of the capitalist system. Once we overcome them it will be capitalism that will usher in the era of plenty. Capitalism can and will build a land of plenty for our people in our country long before Socialism can rise to that in the East."
	Capitalism had apologists, defenders, upholders, whip-wielders, palm readers, soothsayers, and fortunetellers aplenty. Yet in those days of the depression it was unable to produce one single proponent with faith sufficient to stand up in the market place and prophesy:
	"Within twenty-five years in these very same United States employment will rise to more than 6o million; nearly two in
225
every three families will own their own homes; our people will be better fed, better clothed, better sheltered than any nation in history-all under a capitalist system!"
The faith of the capitalists was shaken.
	The faith of the middle classes, merchants, professionals was shaken.
The faith of the workers and farmers was shaken.
	Our faith alone was strengthened. There was no unemployment in the Soviet Union!
	The men of good will, the humanitarians and the kind in heart, the sentimentalists brought forth their healing salves. "Man is good in heart," they prayed. "We'll have to reach the hearts of the employers with kindness."
	"Give a job," pleaded, urged, cajoled Heywood Broun from the depth of his heart in his newspaper column and over the radio. He received four offers of jobs and 400 applicants stood in line for them.
	Men of charity set up bread lines and soup kitchens. "How long have you been waiting in this line, Bud?" I asked one of the men in front of Bernarr Macfadden's soup kitchen.
	"I got here a little after five in the morning," the man told me. He expected to get his soup "pretty soon," in about two or three hours. That was at 2:30 in the afternoon.
	Nutrition experts gave advice and the papers printed it. There was nutrition in grass, they proved, that could sustain human life if cooked long enough, say six to eight hours, and eaten in sufficiently large quantities, say six to eight pounds. There was still the matter of the bitter taste, but one can't have everything. They did not say how to reopen shut-off gas meters. We Communists had to teach the unemployed that trick.
	Other nutrition experts were more realistic. They offered menus for the less destitute. A given minimum quantity of barley and oats mixed with some kind of cheap seed germ, they promised, would provide a nutritionally balanced diet for a person
for only one and three quarter cents a day, or seven cents for a family of four. This discoverey, too, was hailed in some papers.
	The only people in America who had professed to understand the true causes of the Depression were the Marxists. It was all down there in black and white, in the first volume of Karl Marx's Das Kapitcil, also in the red-inked pages of the Communist Manifesto.
	The Socialists of Norman Thomas, the Musteites, the Socialist Labor Party, the IWW, all loudly asserted that the depression was the long-predicted breakdown of the capitalist production system which only social reforms could remedy.
	But we were not only Marxists, we were Marxist-Leninists. We were certain that we knew even better. At the 6th Congress of the Communist International in 1928, fully one year before the stock market crash, at the height of the boom, Bukharin had warned that we were entering a new period in post First World War capitalist development.
	"The Third Period-A period of capitalist crisis, of wars and revolutions," the thesis had asserted.
	We Communists far outdistanced in boldness the other Marxiss whom we denounced as "social-fascists." We had the brassier lungs, the brasher manner, we had our party discipline, and the fanaticism of martyrdom. We also had something else-we had a star of our own to guide us-the five-pointed Red Star rising with ever-brighter flame in the firmament in the East, while the tircd constellation of capitalism was sinking in the West.
	We were certain that we alone knew the score and we yelled it from the roof tops at the top of our lungs.
"This is no cyclical depression that reforms can cure."
"Capitalism is in crisis! Times are bound to get much worse!"
	The lines outside the factory gates were growing larger by the day. "No help wanted" signs blossomed all over the land, nailed down permanently over the windows of employment offices. The men waiting helplessly outside the gates cast envious glances at the men employed within. The men working inside
	226	227
the plants stole baleful and apprehensive glances at the long line of job applicants outside-the capitalist's dream of the ideal setup for wage cuts.
	"Capitalism will utilize the crisis to cut wages-to speed you up!" we trumpeted.
	We were vociferously bearish in a declining economy, and we guessed right. Every calamity we predicted quickly came true with a vengeance, and brought in its wake greater human suffering than even we had anticipated.
	We exulted in our wisdom! Leninism, dialectical materialism provided us with the key to the secret of the future. We prophesied even more dire events, and capitalism co-operated with us. The more frantically capitalism tried to stop the decline, the more blunders it committed. Instead of expanding the economy, it kept cutting back, bringing more unemployment as a result.
	Capitalism was thinking in reverse, it wanted to fit production to declining consumption to eliminate "surplus." As a consequence, the more people were laid off the less they were able to buy. That brought further layoffs which curtailed consumption still more-and the circle thus widened; the more people lost their jobs, the greater the surpluses grew. The national income was shrinking by the day-now was the time for the government to act.
	The government did act. President Herbert H. Hoover, the production wizard and economic genius-for had he not by his own efforts in his youth amassed a fortune running into millions -was a hardheaded realist who wouldn't let his Quaker heart enter the calculations of his brains. He pecked away at his adding machine trying to get the ledger to balance. As an engineer he knew that the machinery was jammed yet he bore down harder on the keys in the blind hope that somehow the machinery would right itself and come up automatically with the right answer.
"The budget has to be balanced!" he stated the new formula.

228
	Consequently the currency was even more deflated, making money still tighter to borrow, thus further inhibiting production. Government revenues were shrinking so he fired more government employees, heaping more humans on the castoff pile.
	We knew what the remedy was. We shouted for reforms, for government relief, for social insurance.
"Tax the rich to feed the poor!"
We roused the people, we drummed it into their heads:
	"Don't starve in silence! Raise your mighty voice! Cry out until your distress is heard, until no ear can be plugged against it in whatever high places!"
	We issued leaflets and we distributed them-a handful of us, 3,000 party members in the United States in 1930 out of a population of some 130 million souls.
	We worked day and night. We were inept; we were rent by factions. Many of us hardly knew English and those of us who did spoke a strange jargon half of which we ourselves did not comprehend. Our voices were shrill, we spoke with accents guttural and harsh to which American ears had not heretofore been attuned.
	W were full of compassion for the sufferings of mankind, we lived in hopes of a better world to come. We were dedicated Men, ready to sacrifice ourselves to bring about that better world for all mankind. The masses needed help. They were ready to act if someone would only lead them, if someone would only show them how.
	We were eager for that mission! We had initiative-and we had guts. We were ready to learn from the people and also to teach them a trick or two.
	A party of ,ooo members of whom not even half were active boldly issued calls for mass demonstrations. Millions responded.
	We spoke at street corners and crossroads, in squares and county seats, in towns and villages where we had never set foot before. We talked and the inhabitants listened to that strange

229
talk, the like of which had not been heard even during the presidency of Andrew Jackson, part of which they didn't even understand, much less agree with. But they approved the parts they wanted to hear, the parts they understood because they had already spoken them silently in their hearts and which we now made vocal for them.
	"What kind of a father are you? Will you let your hungry children cry because you are too proud to accept the dole?"
	"Are we too proud to accept the dole? No! No! A thousand times no!" we thundered raising our fists.
	Tens of thousands of other fists rose in unison with ours, hundreds of thousands of other throats shouted with us in defiance.
	We not only spoke, we also organized. A young comrade hitchhiked to Allentown, Pennsylvania with five cents in his pocket, to a town where he did not know a soul. He had arrived at the square at two in the afternoon, he told me, sat down on a bench, and started to ask the others sitting there where he could get a job in Allentown.
	"You can't get a job in this town," he was told bitterly. "They are not hiring anybody. The mills are still laying off."
	By four o'clock he was standing on a park bench making a speech, by five he was chased by the police. By six he had been invited for dinner and had a place to sleep. By seven men were coming to the home of his host for a meeting. By nine that evening the first Unemployed Council in the history of Allentown was formed.
	A group of mountaineers in the Ozarks lifted their hunting rifles off the hook and walked down the hill to the country store. "We don't aim to do you any harm," they said to the storekeeper, as reported in the papers, "all we aim is to take some supplies for we are out of groceries and ain't got the money to pay for it." They loaded up with flour, sugar, tobacco, fatback, lard, and cornmeal but did not touch the cash in the till. They were not robbers, only men out of jobs, and they were getting hungry.
	We sent Comrade Emil Gardos (the last I heard he was one of the heads of the State Chemical Trust in Hungary) to track them down and to recruit them into the party. Gardos succeeded in making contact with them, he told me, and they averred, reckoned, and were mighty proud-neither of us had any ear
for dialect-to join such a fine organization as that "Communistical Party" they had heard about. They joined up, about seventeen of them, and then sheepishly said that the Hoskins brothers had a powerful hankering to join, too, but they didn't see how they could be admitted to that "Communistical Party" seeing as the brothers just didn't have any rifles.
	"They were a wonderful group to work with," said Gardos with wistful eyes, "but we finally had to drop them. They insisted on bringing their rifles to the party meetings and we couldn't have that. It could have brought disaster on the entire oparty."
	We agitated. We propagandized. We exploited every opportunity to organize.
	The Schrafft restaurant chain in New York advertised for busboys-several of them: "Ten dollars a week, college graduates only." Two hundred some odd young college men had been hopefully milling around for hours since dawn by the time the personnel manager arrived. He surveyed that horde of applicants then superciliously called out:
"Graduates of Harvard and Yale, step forward."
	In less than a minute that place was a shambles, the besieged manager frantically calling for police from behind his barricaded door. Not a single one of those young college men had until thcn been a member of the Communist Party, but subsequently
oite a number of them joined.
	Violence? What would you have done if all you had was a diploma from Princeton, Columbia-or horrors! from the City C liege of New York?
We organized Unemployed Councils. We organized delega-
	230	231
tions to call on councilmen, congressmen, mayors, other officials, even in the privacy of their own homes.
	At one unit meeting I attended in Cleveland, a comparatively new member of the party, Comrade Lombardi, was listening with ever-diminishing patience to a discussion of whether the unit should lead the proposed unemployed delegation to a certain councilman's home or his office. A desperate relief situation was developing in that district and that councilman was hostile to the demands of the unemployed, dodging their delegations. Comparative merits of either step were discussed at length until finally Comrade Lombardi lost his temper. He banged on the table.
	"We go to da house. If he not home we go to da office. We breaka da window, breaka da furniture, breaka da desk and set 'em on afire! Next point on da agend' is da Daily Worka. Comrades, da Daily Worka is in a very bad condidution. . .
	I lectured that unit, especially Comrade Lombardi, that the party neither approved of such tactics nor condoned them. Comrade Lombardi was amiable.
	"O.K., we no breaka da window, no smasha da furniture, no set 'em on afire. We only tear up da papers."
	We unofficially compromised on tearing up only a few papers, and those only when nothing else availed. As it turned out, even that wasn't necessary. The unemployed crowded into that office until there wasn't an inch of space left, until that councilman was pushed against a corner, nose to nose with Comrade Lombardi. Lombardi talked and the councilman agreed. From then on he also became a co-operative councilman.
	Violence? Maybe. But those unemployed had the right to be heard, to address their grievances to their elected representatives.
	When thousands of families had their gas meters shut off and their electricity disconnected we organized emergency flying squads of experts to connect up gas pipes, restore the cut-off current.
232
	Violation of private property rights? Maybe. Have you ever seen a mother with four hungry young children sobbing in the kitchen slumped over a dead gas range, unable to heat even water? I have. And we did something about it. We would also pick up the furniture of evicted families dumped on the sidewalk and carry it piece by piece, two, three, six flights up back to the old apartment.
	Interference with enforcement of the law? Maybe. In Cleveland silver-haired Sheriff Sulzman, four times elected sheriff by a great popular majority in the County of Cuyahoga, most heavily populated county in the sovereign state of Ohio, called us aside one time, when he found himself way behind in carrying out the hundreds of writs of eviction issued by the local courts. We had interfered too often, with too many street fights and minor riots, and the arms of his deputies were getting weary with both fighting and lugging furniture down.
	"Listen, boys," he said, "why can't we get together on this? Let's be sensible. Why fight? Why not make it easier for both of us? I have to carry out the orders of the courts. Let's have a system. We'll carry a few sticks of furniture out to satisfy the judgment of the court and you won't interfere. You will then only have to carry a few pieces back. Everybody is happy and nobody gets hurt."
	It worked out fine. Who said the Communists wouldn't cooperate with law-enforcement agencies?
	We organized hunger marches to dramatize the plight of the unemployed. The "marchers" traveled by trucks and they were showered with so much food at every stop by local citizens who gathered around them in sympathy that many of those "marchers" had gained a few pounds by the time they returned. One truck broke down-it had not only been fixed free but came back with two new tires as a gift from some garage man on the road.
In some places bloody fights took place. We didn't start them,

233
it was the police that attacked us, particularly in company-owned towns. We were met with threats, with denunciations, with arrests, with deportations. Firehoses bowled us off our feet with torrents of icy water in subzero weather. We were met with police clubs, blackjacks, riot guns, machine guns, even with tanks, led in person by bemedaled General Douglas MacArthur in a steel helmet, on the fiats of Anacostia in Washington.
	Scores of us were killed, hundreds of us were wounded and jailed, thousands of us were beaten, had our skulls cracked.
	But we couldn't be silenced. Hundreds of thousands of the unemployed followed us, millions of the starving prayed for our success.
We developed lungs of leather and we demanded!
	Mayor Davis of Cleveland once told a group of newspapermen-I was one of them-"Those people are too arrogant. Maybe if they were to ask politely we'd let them have something, but I won't give in to demands."
It wasn't arrogance. It was sound tactics.
	Those who ask are timid. A supplicant puts himself in a subservient position, he accepts his inferior position as preordained. He submits his fate to the whim of his patron; he proclaims in advance he has no rightful claim and that he would be grateful for whatever favors are shown-please! He begs for charity.
	By demanding relief we asserted our claim that all men willing to work in an organized society are entitled to a job, that the government has a responsibility for the welfare of all the governed. That it is the responsibility of governments to keep their economic systems balanced, that a government has to interfere when one third of a nation is ill-fed or nonfed, ill-clothed or nonclothed, ill-sheltered or nonsheltered.
	President Herbert Hoover was a man of brains, but his mind did not comprehend that. He had brought the land to near chaos and ruin.

234
	President Franklin D. Roosevelt was a man of heart-his heart comprehended that, and he saved our American form of government.
	We demanded, and that was rude. We demanded, and we wouldn't be sent to the backdoor for a handout. When one demands, you have to lick him or negotiate with him-one or the other. When they couldn't lick us, rather they licked us often, but when they found we wouldn't stay licked, they had to negotiate.
	It was a fight. What a fight! In the end we won the major part of our immediate demands, thus helping to restore the stability of the capitalist system-although Marx, Engels, Lenin, and Stalin, who inspired us, had exactly the opposite in mind.
We got the dole.
We got relief baskets.
We got Home Relief-in cash.
	We got W.P.A., P.W.A., H.O.L.C., F.H.A, and the other F.H.A. (Farms and Homes Administration).
We got Unemployment Insurance and Social Security.
	We got the philosophy embodied in the first article in our Constitution re-established, that our government is responsible for the general welfare of the people and must interfere in the economic life of the nation to secure this.
	Say what you please! Deny if you wish! Distort our role, or minimize it; give credit for the above achievement to whomever you wish!
	One fact is outstanding-it cannot be denied. The Communists were the only organized force during the early part of the depression that relentlessly, with never-ceasing energy, generated the constant pressure compelling those New Deal reforms.
	The other day I saw a woman in front of me at the supermarket cash her unemployment insurance check. It was for $35. She had bought a basketful of groceries, butter, and half a

235
smoked ham. She carefully counted her change, then, as an afterthought, she asked for a carton of cigarettes. She paid over the money for that too, tucking the change in her wallet.
	I smiled and remarked, "It's quite a load you have." She smiled back and replied, "I prefer to do my shopping all in one, then I'm through for the week." We both agreed that was a good idea and I watched her wheel the wire basket out to her car because her purchases were too heavy to carry by hand.
	She was a young woman around twenty-four and she saw nothing unusual in that transaction. I was happy and reflected that was as it should be.
	I recalled the riot at Kroger's in Cleveland just about the time that young woman was born, not over a full carton but only a single pack of cigarettes. One of the unemployed, when presenting his relief voucher, had asked that a package of cigarettes be included. The manager refused; by orders of the City Council those relief vouchers should only be honored for food, and he righteously added that the unemployed should be thankful to get something to eat, the nerve of some of them asking even for cigarettes. Some comrades happened to be present and that store was nearly wrecked by the time the manager tremblingly offered to turn over that pack of cigarettes. That news traveled fast, stores outside of the Kroger chain took note of it also. The clerks were speedily instructed to disregard that order of the City Council. From that day on no storekeeper again raised the question whether the unemployed had the right to a smoke or not.
	Violence? Persuasion maybe, with a singular lack of tact on both sides.
	I also recall a sequel to that incident. The Communists organized a march on City Hall demanding that relief be paid in cash instead of food vouchers. A councilman with a big cigar in his mouth smiled ironically!
	"So they could spend it on joy rides, or even cigars, I presume?" he baited the delegates.
236
	That cigar was rammed down his throat and a full-scale riot ensued. The police rushed in and blood splattered the floor of the Cleveland Council Chambers. Heads were cracked and demonstrators were jailed. But we got the cash relief.
	Violence? Yes. But be it remembered-we bore the brunt of it.
Deplorable? Maybe.
Un-American? Like a hungry stomach.
Subversive? Ask Andrew Jackson.
	The ways of the Lord are inscrutable. God in His wisdom may choose whatever instrumentality to impose His will upon selfish men with hearts of stone-even card-carrying Communists.
Aye, that He may.
	Come the Day of judgment, my plea for redemption shall rest on that.
237
