E
[1
Ii
Ii THE bright h0pes raised by our successful offensive
in recrossing the Ebro did not last long. The Spanish Loyalist Government lacked arms, supplies, trained manpower to exploit
our initial success, and our advance soon bogged down. That offensive bled the Internationals white; we no longer had any
manpower left to supply even the steel frame which kept our brigades together. Our usefulness as shock troops for the Loyalist Army was irrevocably past.
Recognizing this practical state of affairs Prime Minister Juan
Negrin resorted to a master stroke. He publicly declared before the Cortez on September 21, 1938, that all Internationals on the
Loyalist side would be withdrawn from the front at once and sent out of Spain as rapidly as arrangements could be made with other countries to admit them. In turn be asked that the Non— Intervention Committee compel Franco also to withdraw the Italian and Nazi troops fighting on his side—to let Spain deadc her own fate without the aid of foreign interventionists.
It was a noble gesture although a rather feeble one and d}: Fascists knew it. By that time the number of all internatiOIlélls in
Loyalist Spain was way under 8,000. Of the over—all number 0
50,000 Internationals who had gone to Spain, two Gilt Of every three or about 35,000 of them had been killed in battle 01' suc‘
cumbed to their wounds later.
Hitler and Mussolini cynically responded by annouDCing the:
too, would withdraw their forces, but man for man-'01": F3501 for each International, or a total of 8,000 out of their 200,000
foreign Fascist troops. 438
55

V
¥
Shortly afterward I was summoned to Barcelona by Inspector General Luigi Gallo, Marty's deputy (at this writing the head of the Communist version of Hitler's storm troopers in Italy), to take over the editorship of the final issues of the Volunteer for Liberty. I objected to that assignment and proposed someone else in my place; I had had my fill of Party propaganda.
I was overruled. As it transpired the editorship of the Volunteer
for Liberty was to be only an incidental part of my duties. I was wanted mainly to help complete the historical record of the
International Brigades, that old assignment I had forgotten.
In the ensuing weeks, from the time of my transfer to Barce- Iona until the XV Brigade was formally disbanded, I only visited the Brigade twice, both times by ofhcial invitation; the
first one proved highly distasteful, the second most depressing. The Erst visit was at the urgent request of John Gates, trans- mitted by courier, but giving no reason for it. Although puzzled, I welcomed the excuse to get away from under the despotic eyes
of Marty in Barcelona if even for a day or two.
When I entered headquarters I found Gates, that once modest
and indifferently dressed young comrade whom I knew to be a
nonsmoker now sporting a fancy tailored uniform, topped off with the highest oHicer's cap ever displayed in Spain. He was
PllHing on a fat, expensive imported cigar, sprawled back with his feet on his desk. When he saw me enter he swaggered over
find instead of shaking hands he started to roar at me that I was
i; trouble, that I didn't know him well if I thought he would
so :16 first away with it, that he'd have me court-martialed and talkin. bwas stunned; I had not the least idea what he was
hand Eaakout untll he finally bellowed at me, he wanted me. to did I ac: 131" Once the funds that belonged to the Commissariat,
I Still 211:1 y think he would let me get away With it? .
With the lb not comprehend it. That money had been deposued
the Small :gades hnanaal oHicer for safekeeping, all except
an hOIlest indy cash that was handled by my clerk, lose Civera, trustworthy Spanish comrade. I had made a note
439

of all that and given it to Dave Gordon to turn over to Gates
because I had to hurry to catch my transport for Barcelona; .
Gordon knew that I had depos1ted that money. I told that to
Gates but he was unbelieving.
We called in Dave Gordon. At first he disclaimed knowing
anything about it, but after I hammered away at him he ad- mitted I might have told him about the deposit and he might
have forgotten to mention it to Gates but flatly denied having received that note. I recognized Dave Gordon's fine knife
technique in that; he was going back to Ohio with a rather
questionable record and had hoped to pull me down with him. The brigade finance cilia: was far away, it took more than two
hours to locate the hnance oHicer. I had never felt such acute distress even in the tightest situation in the field. I was in a
perfect spot for a frame; in the Party the accusation of em- bezzlement is the first step to political liquidation, in Spain to
physical liquidation as well.
The Finance oflicer acknowledged having that money on de-
posit with him, every centavo of it. It was a considerable sum, as I recollect it, most of it the accumulation of the pay of those killed in battle whom the commissars would not report dead
so their pay could be collected to swell the party's political fund, thus defrauding the Loyalist Government.
That put Gates in an embarrassing situation. At one time he might have apologized for such unwarranted behavior to- ward an old comrade but now he was Brigade Commissar; a
party leader is infallible, he can't admit to mistakes. He tried to justify his attitude by blustering that I should have asked him
for authorization before depositing the political funds with the military where it might be sequestered. I retorted since I was
responsible for that money it was natural for me not to want to r151‘ 105mg it by carrying it with me into battle.
11 rank
turn
On my way back to Barcelona I wondered why a rise i should so greatly change a Communist for the worse,
440

even that once-modest young man into a swaggering autocrat? I attributed it to character deficiency in Gates and to his over-
whelming vanity which I myself had helped to nourish by writing a few flattering articles about him. I wasn't astute enough to realize that the major part of the blame rested with the totali- tarian structure of the party. In a democracy the exercise of power is circumscribed and limited by law. In totalitarian societies, the leaders are the law and therefore their power is absolute. Of course they too share the risk of running afoul of someone higher
up whose power over them in turn is again absolute—retro—
actively so, as many Soviet leaders have found out to their sorrow when it was their turn to be purged. . . .
The last time I was officially invited to return was to par—
ticipate in the formal withdrawal of the Internationals from the Brigade. It was a weird farewell. The ceremonial speeches, the
exchange of formal assurances and regrets between the departing Internationals and the remaining Spaniards could not mask the
deep emotional chasm—the Internationals were jubilant, they were going home to the safety and enjoyment of civilian life; the Spaniards were despondent, they were left to face death
by themselves.
After the ofhcial ceremony was over I found myself surrounded
by a sea of Spanish comrades. We exchanged handshakes and embraces, some of them wept openly. I like to believe that I am not easily moved yet my eyes watered and my voice was husky.
Captain Diaz, the Nationalist, looked deep into my eyes.
"Deserting the sinking ship, eh, Voros?" He said it in a soft voice, so low that no one around could hear him.
"This is the Communist fulfillment, ngdad?"
I could not answer in words, merely put my arm around him. I felt lower than a ship's rat. Captain Diaz and I would often
:rgue Communism in private but I had not been able to convert rm.
Now I knew why!
44I

E losI
Ii 0ooo
[i
56 E WHILE the Americans rejoiced, the volunteers of
many other nationalities faced the prospect of withdrawal from
Spain with grave concern.
The Americans had nothing to fear from returning to their
homeland. The only charge that could be raised against them
was violation of a passport regulation, at worst a minor offense, and the wide anti—Fascist, pro—Loyalist sentiment in the U.S.A. made prosecution for it extremely doubtful.
However, the Germans, Italians, Yugoslavs, Hungarians, Greeks, Bulgarians, Austrians, Poles, etc.——many of them with a blood price on their heads—could not possibly return to their
own Fascist or semi-Fascist countries without facing long—term Imprisonment, torture, and even death. Many of those exiles had had hopes of settling in Spain after the war, of finding a haven
thfire after eXiSting for years like hunted animals, hiding out with forged passports only one step ahead of the police, im—
Eiismied fin. false entry time after time, and shunted from one we
as honoreodf lci1vti1n2genso.ut their lives in their

to—the Soviet Union. I considered that a cheerful alternative, this was the preferred choice of most of them anyway.
"They have fought the Fascists, the foes of mankind; now
they will have a chance to help build Socialism in the only socialist country in the world—the fulfillment of the Communist
dream! History is working out well for them, the only reward
worthy of aspiration." I wrote a warm farewell to them in an editorial for the Volunteer for Liberty, congratulating these
Internationals on their good luck in going to the Soviet Union.
My first intimation that there was something wrong with that concept came when I was unexpectedly summoned by Marty.
Waving the proofs of that editorial with its Spanish translation in my face he began to scream: Who gave me the right to
formulate policy for the Soviet Union? He tore those proofs to bits and ordered me out of his sight, raving that although he knew all Americans were arrogant and stupid, yet he hadn't
expected to encounter such colossal political idiocy in a leading comrade.
I left in a daze. I did not have the faintest idea what was
wrong. Basically that editorial was nothing more than a friendly, run of the mill expression of solidarity with the Soviet Union and the international working class, such as any Communist edi- tor would write year in and out, by the ream.
The next day I found a note on my desk addressed to all editors announcing the new official line we were to follow, i.e., the volunteers who were the nnest and most experienced anti— Fascist comrades in the world were badly needed in the demo- cratic countries to lead the fight there against Fascism; hence that is where all of them must go.
I must indeed have been a political idiot as Marty had charged because I didn't catch on even then. In fact, I approved of that new line and thought it logical until a German colleague en—
lightened me. He was witheringly sarcastic, deriding me as a 443

self—righteous, insensitive, smug on me furiously.
American
and finally turned
"Don't you see what this line actually means?"
I didn't, even though I tried hard. That line sounded solid to
me.
"It means the Soviet Union has shut her doors in our face,
you fool!" he almost hissed in hate. His long—practiced party- leader mask was gone, his face was writhing with emotion.
"We have no place to go, can't yet understand that! Which
country would permit us, seven—probe Communists, to enter her gates? Would you expect the capitalists to invite us in and say, ‘please cut our throats and ring the death knell of capitalism over our tomb!' We are the battle—tested, battle—scarred Com- munists who have fought to the death at the call of the Com- intern, and now the Soviet Union is refusing us asylum. We're doomed, doomed by the Soviet Union, we may even end up by being handed over to Hitler!"
He turned away from me, his face buried in his hands.
Up until then I knew him only as one of those close—mouthed, secretive Germans who rebuff all attempts at friendship and
intimacy, careful not to show any emotion. Now that hard- bitten revolutionary actually sobbed. The enormity of that
revelation affected me greatly. I found there was nothing I could do or say; I tiptoed out of his office. I did not know then how
prophetic his words were—that many of them would indeed be handed over to Hitler by Stalin after the Nazi-Soviet Pact
in 1939 to celebrate that love feast. . . .
When we crossed into France the men went wild over the
sight of real milk and white bread with which we were greeted at the French railroad station. At Le Havre we were held up
nearly a week because of a strike by the French seamen. Al-
though we were confined to the grounds I managed to slip out and mingle with the population.
When we finally sailed from France we made strange pas- 444

sengers. Even though we had been deloused, most of us out of sheer habit were still scratching our armpits, rectums, and
genitals in full View of the other passengers who, alarmed, un- derstandably would have no trafiic with us. Few if any of the
volunteers were aware of this rebuff. They, too, preferred to keep their distance, contemptuous as they were of those "lousy capi— talists."
445
