[1 LT
6O Ii ADDICTION to Communism is like addiction to [1:
drugs—the victim resists the cure and is reluctant to admit the destructive side of his habit. '
My withdrawal symptoms manifested themselves in prolonged
periods of mental anguish which made me shun contacts with the outside world. My companionship was limited to my wife—-
my old—time girl friend from the days long past. She had con— sented to marry me even though she knew I had no prospects
of a job, that in the months until the fur season opened up we’d have to exist on my remaining savings from my foreman days which by then had shrunk to less than two hundred dollars. She had no job either and we lived in a furnished room on a
carefully planned subsistence level, limiting ourselves to a strict
budget of ten dollars a week out of which rent took four, to a diet of soup and cheap staples with an occasional splurge of a
Sunday meal at Stewart’s Cafeteria. For newspapers I depended on the trash baskets of the near—by subway station, spent money
only on the Daily Worker—no comrade threw that away, his instructions were to leave it on the subway seat in the hope that
some bored passenger might pick it up.
Since the subway cost a nickel I stopped riding it. I walked
about sixty blocks each way to the few party unit meetings I forced myself to attend. Those units were called branches now.
My branch met in a fencing studio around Twenty-third Street and the comrades were mostly professional people, men and
women in their late twenties and early thirties. I didn’t know 460

'
them and they knew me only by my party name which was Douglass. I was content to leave it that way and they didn’t make much eifort to know me better, either. I sat through those meetings Without participating in their earnest discussions about changing the fate of the world which, as far as their own role was concerned, usually revolved around the question whether to sell the Daily Worker on one specified corner in preference to another. Little had changed in party routine in those ten years since my first attendance at a party meeting in New York; assign- ments were as seriously debated and as little carried out as then. The main difference that I saw was that these comrades were
arguing dialectics with a choicer vocabulary and with less of an accent.
The last party meeting I was ever to attend happened to fall
on the day the afternoon papers headlined the outbreak of an army revolt in Madrid, and reported that Negrin and other
government and party leaders had fled Spain in their private
planes. I was brooding over those developments, distressed over the fate of those faithful in the ranks who had no private planes
in which to escape, when the voice of the literature chairman
brought me sharply to my senses. He was holding aloft a party
pamphlet just issued, written by Joe North, former Daily Worker
correspondent in Spain, former editor of the New Masses, then the Daily Worker's special expert on Spain.
“It is a most important pamphlet,” the chairman intoned,
“everybody should buy as many as he or she can afford, it ex- plains the party line on Spain. This pamphlet refutes the lies of the Fascist provocateurs, it proves why the Loyalist Army will
continue to fight on for years until victory is assured. It must be distributed in quantity to reach the greatest masses of people.” The comrades each dutifully bought several of them. I picked
11P a Copy and leafed through it. Incredible as this may seem it bore the title “Why Loyalist Spain Will Win!” or some such
Words. Ice North did not hog all the credit for that brilliant 461
i

dialectical forecast of history. He modestly acknowledged that his analysis had merely confirmed the correctness of the party line and the previous reports made by those other two eminent researchers and objective scholars, Robert Minor and John Gates.
I lifted my eyes and saw that the noses of all comrades Were buried in the pamphlet. Then the silence was broken by a comrade on my left commenting with loud satisfaction:
“This pamphlet sure came just in time. Now we’ll know how
to answer the lies of the Fascist Hearst and the other capitalist
newspapers.” His words were greeted with spontaneous applause. I got to my feet and walked out without giving them a further
glance; what the hell was I doing there among those political cretins?
Other incidents of similar idiocy followed in quick succession,
making it more and more diHicult to put off resolving the issue. Like the time I attended a new Theater League perform-
ance somewhere around Fiftieth Street off Broadway.
It was an anti-Nazi play by Bertolt Brecht, the famous Ger-
man revolutionary playwright. It was the tragedy of an honest,
upright German Reich justice who had retained his position on the bench even under the Nazis, although deep in his heart he
was still devoted to the principles of true justice as they existed in Germany before Hitler. The play opened with the justice and his wife fearfully discussing their horrible suspicion that their own beloved only son, a loutish boy of 14 who belonged to the Hitler Youth, might be capable of denouncing his own father
as being disloyal in thought to the Nazis. True enough, exactly that was to happen to him. Few eyes remained dry at the con— clusion of the play as that German judge was led away by brutal stormtroopers wearing swastika armbands while their son, that monster product of Nazi training, proudly declaimed from the stage that no true Fascist must ever hesitate to denounce his
own father and mother if they were disloyal, if only in thought, to the Nazi Reich.
462

There was tremendous applause and many curtain calls. The
party comrades were cashing in on the play by loudly hawking their literature when one of the leaders of that theatrical group
turned to me with pride: what did I think of the performance, wasn’t Bertolt Brecht a genius? I praised the performance and told her how it moved me; as to Brecht, he was obviously a man of great talent but in this instance, unquestionably also a dis- honest plagiarist. Those were lighting words. I was immediately
challenged to prove that and in no time became the center of a large crowd, mostly hostile. I asserted that the play was based almost verbatim but without acknowledgment on a Soviet news
report. Hostility now gave way to perplexity and I was asked to elucidate.
I related how, early in 1935, following the assassination of
party leader Kirow in Leningrad when the first big Soviet
purge began, the Party had called on the Young Pioneers to ferret out the hidden counterrevolutionary sentiments of their
parents and report it to the G.P.U. We at the Uj Elore once published a report on one such trial sent to us by the official Soviet News Agency which gave details of the exemplary Com-
munist behavior of a young boy of 14, a leading member of the
Young Pioneers, whose suspicion became alerted when he saw his father abruptly stop talking to his mother the minute he
entered the room.
This incorruptible product of Soviet upbringing had not only
denounced his father to the G.P.U. but also blazingly repudiated his father’s cowardly denial of the charge. He denounced him in
open court as a barefaced liar, demanded that his father pay with his life for his traitorous sentiments, and called upon all Young
Pioneers to overlook all sentiment and follow his example. In conclusion that news report proudly noted that this outstanding
Young Pioneer leader was the first one to applaud in court when he heard his father pronounced guilty and sentenced to death.
When I finished my tale the group around me hastily dis- 463

solved except for a few innocents who stayed on to argue that I really couldn’t be serious in maintaining that there was any
analogy at all between those two cases? Couldn’t I see that the theme of this play was the bestial corruption of youth under
Hitler? Wasn’t it also clearly evident that the story I quoted was about the trial of a bourgeois counterrevolutionary traitor in the pay of the imperialists? No, the only thing evident to me was that I had overstayed my welcome and I left in the glare of hostile eyes.
Then came signs.
Within a period of two days three letters came to me un-
expectedly from France. One was from Alexander Cseresznyes, the other from that German commissar, the third from a Spanish
youth leader formerly on my staff in the Brigade. They were from different concentration camps in France, but containing
the same heart-wringing tale of misery and ill—treatment to which those remnants of the defeated Loyalists who crossed into France were being subjected. They were sleeping in the open in midwinter without blankets, clad only in their filthy summer
rags. Those concentration camps were but bare ground sur— rounded by barbed wire, without even wells or latrines, and only
the cold winter sky for roof. They were forced to sleep rolling in their own excrement in holes scratched out of the ground with their bare fingers, drinking the human-sewage-infected water that accumulated in the shallow, handscooped holes in the
ground. Besides being starved they also suffered from their
Senegalese guards who sadistically enjoyed using their whips on them. They were begging me for help, to organize for them
food, money, used clothing, cigarettes, anything. In closing they aliirmed anew their loyalty to the Communist Party and em-
phasized that what they desired above all was political asylum in some country willing to receive them.
I took those letters up to the Friends of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade demanding that we act at once. “Yes, it is too sad, we 464

know all about it, but there is nothing the Friends can do right
now, collections are slow in coming in, we need all the funds to run the office and to take care of the wounded and needy veterans here.”
I lost my temper and demanded an emergency meeting, what those comrades wanted most was a chance to leave France. Pasionaria was not suffering in those camps. She had been trans-
ported with other Communist leaders by boat and special plane to the Soviet Union to be feted there as the last-ditch fighter of
Fascism, even though her son, the offspring of this hery speaker who passionately demanded that every last Spaniard fight to the
death, had sat out the Spanish Civil War in Moscow where his mother had prudently sent him for safety.
I drew up a resolution on the spot and thumbtacked it on the wall :
BE IT RESOLVED: that the Friends and Veterans of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade petition the Soviet Union to offer asylum to all the exiled victims of Franco now languishing in the French concentra- tion camps. .
Be It Further Resolved: that copies of this resolution be sent not
only to the Daily Worker but also to all capitalist newspapers and wire services, for widest dissemination.
By that time there was quite a commotion, my resolution was hastily removed from the wall, and I was upbraided by the paid oHice staff. Didn’t I know what I was doing? How could the
Friends and Veterans of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade be asked to sign such a petition, how could I possibly ask the Soviet Union
to admit those people? Wasn’t I aware who those people actually were? Did I know how many actual spies, saboteurs, counter- revolutionists, imperialist and Fascist agents and spies were
among those “so-called veterans”? Why, mos .
were international wreckers trying to worm their way into the Soviet Union.
“You bastards really believe that? Believe that those comrades 465

stalked out telling them to cross my name off their list,
pronto!
The signs came more rapidly now. Upon his return from
Moscow Gil Green, National Secretary of the Young Communist
League, commented admiringly on the loud, prolonged applause and standing ovation afforded to the party leaders in the Soviet
Union. He contrasted it scathingly with the informal, almost indolent attitude with which the membership received its leaders here and demanded a change. His orders were that in the future the Party and Y.C.L. leaders were to be greeted by the same loud cheers and standing ovation whenever they entered a meeting hall.
The focus became sharper:
FRANCO! FRANCO! FRANCO! SIEG HEIL! HEIL GIL GREEN, BROWDER, STALIN! Arise ye prisoners of starvation;
Goosestep ye wretched of the earth! Damnation shall be your salvation;
Soviets to bring the new rebirth!
Next Stalin spoke and Molotov echoed him.
“The Soviet Union does not consider any imagined or real
ideological differences a barrier to establishing friendly and cordial relationship with any other nation.”
“Fascism is a matter of taste.”
I needed no further signs. My recovery was complete. Cured
bythehairofthesamedog. . . 466
I

E:
6]. n[1 ONCE my eyes recovered their sight I was gal— vanized into action. This was the spring of 1939 and there was
no time to waste. The Nazi war machine was getting ready to roll. People all over the world were pinning their hopes on the
great Soviet Union with its mighty Red Army to forestall the Hitler juggernaut—that illusion needed to be blasted. I sat down
and wrote day and night until I finished the draft of a short book which was aimed to shake the American people into aware- ness that the Soviet Union was just as totalitarian and equally
as imperialistic as Nazi Germany.
That draft was titled “Chronicle of the Second World War,”
as set down by a young reporter with the last surviving Ameri- can troops hiding out in a mountain post, awaiting the last assault. It was a projection of the coming World War II as I visualized it then, with Stalin villainously making war inevitable between Fascism and the democracies, and when they were both
sufficiently exhausted falling first on Hitler, next on the democ- racies, ultimately taking possession of a devastated world.
When I was finished with it I thought of just the right or—
ganization for it—the World Peaceways, a group of pacifists who were not involved with any of the peace fronts of the Com—
munists.
When Mr. Wise, Secretary of the World Peaceways, read that
first draft he became enthused. He was thinking of an initial
printing of 100,000 copies to be followed by a second printing of 200,000 and as many more as public interest in it warranted. 467

He wanted changes though; his suggestions were good and I
agreed to them instantly.
After that first draft was finished I rejoined the furriers
union. Fur shops were still sweatshops and I would get home too fatigued physically to do much writing at night; by the time the manuscript was ready for editing it was late August. Two days later came the news of the Nazi—Soviet pact and my
appointment with the World Peaceways set for the following week was canceled by silent agreement. No one needed my book
any longer to warn him of Stalin’s treachery, Hitler had already invaded Poland.
I followed with sardonic glee the gyrations of the party, the
desperate flip—flops of the comrades to justify that Soviet-Nazi alliance. Yet even I couldn’t foresee their ultimate degradation
—that the remaining members of the Communist Party would
openly work for the victory of Hitler. Thorez, the leader of the French Party, deserted the army and the French Communist
Party issued leafiets calling on all other French soldiers not to hght Hitler but desert. Harry Pollit, the Secretary of the British Party, with whom I once spent a whole night in Madrid, called for making peace with Hitler even while Britain was
being devastated by falling Nazi bombs. The Communist Party of America ordered my one-time Cleveland comrade Wyndham
Mortimer to call a strike against the North American Aviation
Corporation to keep our own country from producing planes in our defense. My former favorite Y.C.L. friend, Al Balint in
Cleveland, led a steel strike to cripple our preparedness while
my former colleague, devout Louis Budenz, the Catholic man- aging editor of the Daily Worker, was openly supplicating for the defeat of the democracies.
In 1940, I incurred the hostility of my Communist union by
joining the Volunteers for Roosevelt for a third term, and on December 8, 1941, the day after Pearl Harbor, I kissed my wife
and infant son good-bye and went downtown to enlist. 468

The line was long, it stretched around the block. More and
more people came to join it; there was shoving and jostling; it was difficult to keep the slowly moving line in order. A couple of young fellows thought I was an easy mark and tried to elbow me out of my place. Naturally I fought back and the Marine
sergeant came up to investigate. “What’s the trouble, Pop? What are you doing here?”
“I came to enlist, what else?”
I was indignant. Here I was, leaving my wife with my six-
month-old son to fend for themselves because principles take
precedence over family obligations; now some young squirt, who as likely as not had no real conception what this war was
about, was trying to push me out of line.
“Come on, Pop, quit it,” said the Marine sergeant with a
friendly grin. He was tall, broad-shouldered—a trained, healthy
specimen. “Be a nice guy, Pop, and give a chance to the young fellows. You don’t belong here, Pop. When we need grand-
fathers, we’ll call you,” he coaxed.
The line rocked with laughter. The sergeant was not being
sarcastic, he was humoring me, to the delight of those young men.
I left the line and walked away.
“Pop,” they called me, and “Grandfather!”
I stopped in front of a plate glass window and took a good
look at my reflection. My face was haggard and deeply etched;
my cheeks sunken over the missing teeth I had lost in Spain and had no money to replace; I was still more than twenty
pounds underweight because of a souvenir from Spain—chronic diarrhea. I was only forty—one, but Pop indeed; my soldiering
days were over. The best a man of my age could expect in modern warfare would be guarding bridges. I went back to work
utterly defiated.
Less than a month after that incident, on a sunny Sunday
morning, I encountered Peter Chaunt, the Party boss of the 469

I.W.O. Hungarian Section. I was wheeling my infant, he was
walking his sleek wolfhound. We stopped to talk. When he asked how I felt about the war I told him about my frustration,
about being too old to join in the fighting. Chaunt became most serious and told me I was in a position to make a very great contribution to fighting Fascism. The Uj Elore was no longer a Communist newspaper, it had changed its name and had been turned into a united front organ to rally all Hungarians in America regardless of creed or political beliefs behind the war effort. The Hungarian Horthy troops fighting alongside the Nazis were then deep in the Soviet Union, yet many Hungarians in the United States were still secretly sympathetic to Horthy. These men were traitors to their adopted country, the United
States, yet were able to influence the ignorant Hungarian masses. Chaunt proposed that I come back and take over editorship of that paper; my name was popular with Hungarians; my past record as a fighting anti-Fascist would make me the ideal cham—
pion to rally the patriotic Hungarian masses around me.
That offer appealed to me. In the mobilization of our national
resources for war I considered certain steps dangerous for the welfare of our nation, like the order that froze wages while
leaving profits uncurbed. I expressed those thoughts to Chaunt, adding the Leninist slogan: “We mustn’t allow the capitalists to profiteer and place the burden of the war on the shoulders of the working class.”
“You’ve really been away too long, you’ve really lost touch,” Chaunt replied condescendingly.
Nothing mattered in this war but one thing, to save the Soviet Union, Chaunt explained the new party line. Let the capitalists make all the profits they can, let them raise prices, do anything
they pleased as long as they turned out the war materials the Soviet Union needed. As Marx said, “The greater the profits,
the greater the capitalist incentive.” We had to spur on this capi- 47o

talist incentive by preventing strikes; by using all our influence to drive the workers to greater productivity, to make them work double shifts and to hell with time and a half for overtime. The interests of the Soviet Union were the supreme guide; if that interest was best served by helping American capitalists to
greater profits, then dialectically that was what we had to do, that was Leninism.
I was too amazed to speak. Chaunt took my silence for agree—
ment. “Come see me tomorrow morning and don’t forget to
bring your statement with you.” “What statement?”
“A statement confessing your errors, admitting that the party
line is always right. Stress particularly how right the party was
in making that nominal pact with Hitler; explain how you be-
came a victim of the warmongers by not realizing that that pact
was the greatest contribution by the Soviet Union to maintain-
ing peace, which only failed because of the Chamberlain and Blum imperialist warmongers.”
Chaunt was petting his dog. It was a sleek, aristocratic wolf- hound—Russian, not Soviet. Chaunt himself looked more pros-
perous than I had ever seen him. “Is it a real united front paper?”
“Sure. That’s why you’re needed so badly, that’s why I want
you to start tomorrow.”
“I am ready to start tomorrow. But I want to publish my
statement as a two—column signed editorial on the front page.” “Why on the front page?”
“Because I want it there. And I want it published as written.” Chaunt was now wary. “Of course the Central Committee will
have to go over it and pass on it before publication. They may want some changes made.”
“Not if it is a united front paper.”
I still played it straight, noting with delight the beginning of a
47I

doubt in Chaunt’s eyes. Now it was my turn to assume the long- familiar Communist tone of lecturing, to count off the points one
by one on my thumb.
Number one: My statement would open with the announce-
ment that I was no longer a party member, that I was assuming
editorship of the paper only because of my firm belief in the need of united effort to bring this war for the survival of democ—
racy to a successful conclusion.
Number two: Next I would explain that I had quit the party
because I was opposed to the tyrannical and despotic practices in the Soviet Union which permeated all Communist Parties in the world.
Number three: I have reached the conclusion that ever since Stalin came into power the Communist Party Line has been
wrong in all its major decisions beginning with the policy in China in 1927 up to and including the criminal adventure of the
Nazi-Soviet pact which exploded the Second World War. Chaunt did not hear me all out. He yanked the dog viciously to his feet and stalked away, his freckled face livid with anger.
There may have been no connection but shortly afterward I
began to experience trouble in the fur market.
I would go on a new job in the morning; there would be
a whispered conversation between the shop chairman and some workers who recognized me; the boss would call me in later and I would be dismissed without explanation or, where the boss needed me badly, with a despondent shrug—“I like your work but I can’t afford to have trouble with the union.” One day I became embroiled in a physical fight. I was called a paid Nazi
spy, sharp furriers’ knives Hashed. Had it not been for the timely appearance of two policemen I might have been carved up or crippled, a fit punishment for an anti—Communist.
That made it obvious both to my wife and me that sooner or later I would be forced out of a job in every fur shop, that we had to leave New York.
472

We counted our resources—a few hundred dollars in cash
savings, some used furniture—a pitifully small stake to start a new existence. Never mind. We settled on a small town, half rural, half urban, which was most unlikely to harbor any Com- munists who knew me.
We moved there convinced that the trail had come to an end; that my life as a Communist would be but a memory of my
past, that nothing would hinder me from adjusting myself to the normal life of a citizen.
It did work out except for the stigma.
473

COMMUNISM
creates its own antibodies. There is
Epilogue
but one group of people in the entire world who are totally im—
mune to all threats and blandishments from Moscow or Peking
-—the former Communists. Paradoxically, there are far more of
us inside the iron curtain than out and our numbers are grow-
ing by the day. The red rulers fear us more than all other of their foes combined; more of us have suffered death and torture
at their hands than all the Communists executed by Hitler, Mussolini, and other Fascist dictators. The people who par—
ticipated in the demonstrations in Poland; the men, women, and children who manned the barricades in Budapest in 1956, were
led by our political blood brothers, the former Communists. Because of our experiences we are the most implacable foes of totalitarianism and the greatest allies in the fight for liberty—- a fact recognized in all lands yet blindly ignored in the United States.
ofI;eis:ct:rcila:x:pl;n 32:1tgiebdemands raised by the revolutionaries
I'CVOlutionary dzmand Def 1Fut the low norms of the morrow. The tion for which my skull hail5 a welfk unemploym'en't compfnsa—
now way below the standa 31106 Gen nearly split in two is by
revolutionary demand of Hftr established in most states. The y cents an hour minimum wage, for
475

which I had been roughly handled and driven out of town at pistol point in Yorkville, Ohio has long been raised to one dollar an hour by a Republican administration, no less.
All nations need their quota of rebels to goad them into enact-
ing those social reforms that are essential to their progress.
Stagnation and decadence invite disaster, for the Goths and Vandals are forever lurking outside the gates in search for the
breach in the crumbling walls.
For having been such a rebel as I was, about a million of my
countryan in all walks of life were made into whipping boys by every demagogue and professional patriot who deals in hate to further his political ambition; branded subversives by op—
ponents of all progressive measures who are hell—bent to restore all evils of the past in their selfish greed. I have never committed
a crime or been charged with one; nor was I ever arrested. I was
never involved in spying nor even knew about it—and that
applies to all but a minuscule percentage of us. The few involved in spying have either gone to jail or glory depending on who
told on whom first. The Communist Party which I quit over
twenty years ago has by now all but disintegrated. Yet, I and my fellow former rebels have been degraded to second-class citizens,
denied even the right of serving our country in the capacities
we are best fitted for because of a panicky law that demands a
negative answer to this question: “Areyounoworhaveyoueverbeenamemberof. . . ?”
Panicky laws do not make for national security, especially when they themselves smack of totalitarianism. Nor can we de—
pend for our national defense on the strength of our arms alone. We need ideological weapons also and trained men to use them—-
experts that are plentiful among former Communists.
Basically there are only three great revolutionary proclamations that exert the most profound infiuence on the mind. The Com-
munist Manifesto is but one of them. The other two in historical order are:
476

The Sermon on the Mount;
The Declaration of Independence.
As a nation born of revolution and a professed Christian one we have a special claim on both of these. Why on earth should we panic when faced with the incendiary cry of revolt.
Arise ye prisoners of starvation . . .
Of all nations in the world we have the best claim to respond: Peace on Earth; Good Will toward Men;
All men are created equal with the unalienable right to life,
liberty, the pursuit of happiness!
In this struggle of ideologies the odds are two to one in our favor if we are but bold enough to take advantage of it. Let us devote our diplomacy, our surpluses, our technological skill with our traditional democratic forbearance to the above aims. Let us persist in this endeavor for another few decades. We will then
discover that we no longer have to fear the rising of those
proletarians who, according to the Communist Manifesto, have nothing to lose but their chains.
There won’t be any of them left!
477
