LcI
I i W left the train at a village before it reached Siofok, the only town of any size on Lake Balaton. The carriage awaiting the doctor had room for only four. The sanatorium was quite a distance from the station so I had all our equipment except the rifles loaded in the carriage and sent the sergeant along with the doctor to make arrangements. The doctor was quite cramped and grumbled that the men should carry more of their equipment, but I made believe I did not hear him. I marched with the men although the natural thing would have been for me to ride with the doctor. But I was apprehensive about the sergeant because he seemed to have more than the usual hold over the men, especially his three pals, and besides, it was setting a good example to have the men see me walk with them. The road was very dusty and made us cough. Setting an example always exacts a price.
	The sanatorium was a huge, sprawling building with many outbuildings right on the shore of Lake Balaton. It had three wings, balconies, a few ornamental turrets, and accommodations for about forty convalescents. It had no patients then. They had pulled out when news of the revolution in Budapest had reached them. When we arrived, the sergeant was waiting for me outside; there was trouble about the billeting. The sanatorium had servant quarters for the maids, also separate quarters for the nurses. The doctor wanted the men housed in the stables.
	"We will billet with the maids, we will billet with the nurses, or we will billet in the sanatorium," said the sergeant to me, "but

52
we will not billet with the horses and cows. There are no patients here, all hospital beds are empty."
	I went back to the doctor to take up the question with him. He was resentful.
"If I'd put them in with the servants they'd have all the
maids pregnant in a week, and full of venereal disease. I would have to set up a venereal ward to treat them. If I'd put them in with the nurses, they'd rape them. Those are enlisted men, the stable is good enough for them." He definitely seemed to be less happy about us now that we were here. I reminded him that I had promised the men beds to sleep in.
"But my beautiful linens! Those men are filthy!"
	I told him he had bath facilities and the men would enjoy a good bath. The linen could be laundered. The men would have to sleep in the sanatorium.
	"This is my hospital. I am in charge here," he shouted. "They will sleep in the stable. I give the orders here."
	Here was trouble. I anticipated trouble from the peasants, trouble even from some of the men, but not from him. Apparently there was more to running a detached unit than Captain Sulacek had taught us. It was getting late. We had not eaten since morning and I was becoming irritable.
	"It is your hospital but it is now under government protection. You asked for that protection and you now have it." Since I was in charge of the men, I informed him, I was in charge of finding suitable quarters for them according to army regulations and, therefore, they would sleep in the hospital. I also told him we needed provisions, and that he could either feed us from his own kitchens or provide us with supplies, in which case we would set up our own kitchen.
	"Oh, the food!" he groaned. "I will now have to provide food for twelve people."
	Evidently he had failed to think the problem through before he went to Budapest. He must have acted in panic.

53
	"Thirteen, with me," I said precisely. I was not afraid of him any more.
	"They can eat with the servants," he decided, and left to arrange for it. At the door he turned:
	"I'll hold you responsible for the conduct of your men," he threatened.
	"I am assuming that responsibility," I said, with official formality. It sounded good, but within twenty-four hours I had reason to regret that statement. He really held me responsible and, in all fairness, he had many points on which to bring me to account.
	I billeted the men in three rooms which held four beds each. The sergeant and his three friends stayed in one room together. The men ate their supper in the kitchen with the servants. The doctor did not invite me to have supper with him. I felt slighted but underneath I was glad. I had my meals served in my room.
	After supper I called the men together and explained the tactical situation to them. Peasants were early risers and went to bed early. If a mass assault was being planned by them, it would develop shortly after dark. Therefore, we should all be in readiness from dark until ten o'clock. After ten we needed two men on patrol until twelve, to chase off marauders. After twelve, a single guard relieved every two hours would be sufficient until six in the morning. The day would be their own except for a daily parade at eleven followed by a one-hour drill period.
	They liked it all but the drill. The supper was good, the beds were clean, the mattresses soft, the pay was high, and the hours of duty were a cinch. They presented no objection until the sergeant said that they needed no drilling, they were all experienced combat soldiers, which I obviously was not. They all chorused agreement.
	That was no good. Discipline loosens without drill and respect for command diminishes.
"The drill is not for your benefit but to impress the country-

54
side," I told them. "It is a show of strength. The peasants will never dare attack when they see such a body of armed and disciplined soldiers."
	That made sense to them and it also made good sense to me as I heard myself voicing it. I had not really thought it through before. There were no objections to the drill after that, not even from the sergeant.
	"Let's put out a noisy patrol tonight, two patrols of six men each, and whenever you see anything suspicious, fire. Let everybody hear you for miles around, let the peasants know that we are here," I concluded the instruction.
	The men did plenty of shooting that night. They did not hit anyone, nor did anyone even approach the sanatorium. They were shooting at shadows, or just shooting. They must have shaken everybody in that village out of his sleep. Even I emptied the clip in my pistol, right under the doctor's bedroom, shouting loudly:
	"Head them off! Get them! They are heading towards the poplars!"
	That brought a volley of answering fire from the men. It was fun.
	The doctor cautiously opened the shutters on his window upstairs and whispered:
"What happened?"
	"Marauders. They were trying to sneak into the pigpen," I whispered back.
"Did you get them?" he whispered.
	"Wounded one of them, I believe," I whispered back. I did not know why I was whispering. There were no marauders. We certainly had no reason amid all that shooting to keep our voices low. I could see why the doctor was whispering, he was scared, but I had nothing to be scared of. Whispering, like fear, is contagious.
It was a good night's performance. All the sanatorium's per-

55
sonnel, including the doctor, was pleased. In the morning there was an evident relief from fear and anxiety all around. The maids were casting admiring glances at the soldiers, who in turn told them and each other how they had fought off the attempted night assault. As I heard them rehash the events of the night I wondered whether they really believed the stories they told. Maybe they did, and maybe they didn't. Maybe they only half believed them. They must have known they were exaggerating, yet convinced there was a core of truth in it.
	We paraded that morning at eleven. It would have beeti customary for the sergeant to do the drilling. I changed that. I told him to take over the calisthenics and give them fifteen minutes of that, let them rest for ten minutes, and I would take over the drill after that. I had no conscious reason for wanting to do the drilling myself, perhaps I wished to feel the power of command and to play at soldiering. Whatever the reason, that decision was to save my life later.
	I joined the men in calisthenics for I knew I was good at it. I took up position in front and set the lead. After the calisthenics were over and we were resting, one man told me, half smiling, half serious:
	"It takes a young limb to have a snap to it." There was laughter.
	"Young roosters hop high!" remarked another. There was more laughter. It made me feel good and I laughed with them.
	Afterward we had our drill. I did parade formations, evolutions, commanding them with drawn saber. All the servant maids, even the nurses, turned out to watch. The audience made the men strut. They drilled rather well and put a snap into it. They enjoyed it. By the end of the seventh day, when we left the sanatorium, I could have taken them to any parade ground. They were really good.
	I wonder why armies do not recruit female audiences. It would speed up basic training considerably.

56
8 i THE days passed quietly and so did the nights. Although rumors reached us that this castle or that estate in outlying villages had been looted or set aflame, we were not molested. The men enjoyed themselves, they had a real vacation for the first time in their lives. They had food, women, and very little work to do. For companionship they had each other and the maids. I had neither and I was getting bored, not being accustomed to idleness. In that entire sanatorium there was not a single book to read. Field-grade officers in the Austro-Hungarian Army had no need for a library. They knew everything, for rank was knowledge. I asked the doctor for some of his medical books to read but he would not lend them to me for fear they would get soiled. I would walk out to the frozen lake shore and hunt for wild ducks with a rifle. I knew I wouldn't hit any, yet every time I missed I felt disappointed.
The doctor annoyed me with his daily complaints.
	"The men cut up a brand-new sheet for foot covering," he accused me. Soldiers of the Hungarian Army were not supplied with socks. They would use rags to wrap around their feet before putting on their boots.
	'It won't happen again," I solemnly assured him, more on hope than knowledge.
	"The men are interfering with the work of the maids," he would complain.
"I'll put a stop to that," I would reply, knowing full well I

57
had no intention of interfering. I wouldn't have gotten anywhere with it anyway.
	"The men are forcing their attentions on my maids against their will," he came storming to me one time. "I will hold you responsible for their behavior." I promised to investigate that complaint at once and went into the kitchen.
	I saw four women working there and I called one of them out. She was a buxom, very pretty young woman with rosy cheeks, about twenty-two, I guessed. She was a bit embarrassed and was twirling her apron.
	"Are my men molesting you?" I asked her. She blushed and said nothing. "The doctor is telling me our men are forcing themselves on you." She still didn't answer.
	"Come on, don't be afraid. Tell me the truth. If they are bothering you women, I'll put a stop to it quick."
	"They are sure no worse than those old officers we used to have around here," she said spiritedly. "Those old goats were really terrible. They were practically ordering us to go to bed with them. And when they pinched it really hurt." She giggled.
"What about my men?"
"Oh, they are sociable. They don't pinch so hard."
	I wanted to get to the bottom of it. "What do they do?" I asked her.
She giggled some more. I pressed her for an answer.
	"Aw, go on with you!" she said, raising her eyes coquettishly to mine. "You know what men do. Why don't you try it sometime? Or maybe you are too young."
	I wasn't too young and I would have liked to try. I thought of it often enough. But I had to set an example, and you have to pay a price for that. Nevertheless, I felt myself blushing. I blushed too damn easily, just like a young boy.
	"Are the men forcing you to do things against your own free will?" My voice was playing tricks on me again. I had been having trouble with it lately. I had a good voice for dealing with

58
men but with women it sometimes came out wrong just when I most wanted it to sound firm. I hoped she did not notice, although she was giggling again.
	"Aw, go on with you," she said. "They are men and we are having fun. It is nice to have your own kind around after all those high and mighty officers. You are a nice young one, why don't you come down to the kitchen one evening and find out for yourself?" She was laughing at me openly, all her former diffidence gone.
	"That will do," I said gruffly and dismissed her. It did not come out gruff, it sounded more like a squeak. She laughed and went inside. I decided against questioning the other three women and walked back. I had to take it slowly and hold my saber at the grip to keep it from getting between my legs from behind, although the normal way to avoid that is by making a kicklike circular motion with your right leg before you put your foot down.
	The next day I told the doctor I had found no evidence that the men were forcing themselves on the maids. The doctor scoffed. He claimed to have it on good evidence, several of the nurses had reported t. I decided to visit the nurses after supper. I had known them all by sight but had had no personal contact with them up until then.
	I shaved carefully that evening, the second time that day, although there was no necessity for it. I could easily have skipped my daily morning shave as well without anyone noticing it much. I was blondish, and besides being very light in color the hair on my face grew at a distressingly slow rate, considering my age. I had been shaving daily because that was supposed to make the beard grow thicker and faster, although I had not found that true in my case.
	The nurses were six in number and occupied three rooms in a separate wing, one of the rooms being used as a sitting room. I knocked on their door, entered, bowed formally, wished them

59
good evening, and addressed them in my most official manner. "Ladies, I am here on official duty. I came here to investigate." Suddenly I did not know how to continue, their stares disconcerted me. It was hard to put it into the right words. I started all over again.
	"I came to investigate the . . ." I still couldn't get any further. That was most unfortunate for they started to smile and this disconcerted me even more. A little red-haired nurse, the youngest of them, was giggling out loud. She did not look much older than I. The others were all much older. The head nurse, a thin woman with a wrinkled face, turned to them disapprovingly.
	"Leave the boy alone. He is only a child. What is it you want, young man?"
	I was blushing, which made me mad. I was grateful to her and yet angry at her. I was not a boy and certainly was no child. I would show them that I could use strong language if that is the way they wanted it.
	"About my men fornicating with the maids," I said in manly fashion.
They burst out laughing.
	"Raping them!" I added for emphasis. Now they were really laughing. One of them exclaimed:
	"That would be a new experience to those sluts." That set them laughing even louder, the little redhead the loudest of them all. It is easy to say "investigate" but in practice it can be quite difficult.
	"I am going to prepare an official report on it and submit it to the higher authorities." This was according to regulations and it went much smoother. "If you have any evidence, you can inform me here, or if that would embarrass you, I am ready to see each of you alone in my room, in private." I should not have added that last because it set them laughing again.
	"What evidence would we have?" asked one of the nurses finally.
6o
	"Eyewitness evidence. The doctor said several of you reported it to him."
	"Oh, the doctor. Don't pay any attention to him. He is mean. Sit down and visit with us. Here, have some candy." They were all speaking at once and they were very friendly. I sat down and we had a most enjoyable time. They were teasing me about my youth, about my presumed innocence and lack of experience. "I would like to show you, especially this redhead," I told them, and now she blushed. I was thinking how to isolate her and take her for a walk but there was no chance. Those nurses presented a solid female phalanx. When I left we were good friends and they invited me to visit them again.
	The next morning I told the doctor the nurses had no evidence. He gave me another one of his sour looks. He had a bigger complaint now. My men had killed one of his pigs, the largest and fattest one.
	I went to investigate that. I found it was pure accident. One of the men had accidentally discharged his rifle and it hit that pig. That pig screamed so loud that it had to be killed to put it out of its misery. There were plenty of witnesses, including the entire kitchen help.
	I gave the doctor a full report on the case but it did not satisfy him. He said somebody would have to pay him for that pig but I disregarded that remark. That night we had fresh pork for supper and it was a welcome change in our diet.
	The next day two fat geese were killed. Again it was an accident, brought about by a most complicated chain of circumstances. We ate the geese.
	Next there were towels missing from the laundry. The doctor wanted me to search the men's packs. I told him I had no reason to suspect my men. The doctor kept insisting on the search. I informed him I was planning to have an inspection soon and then we should see.
"How soon?" the doctor wanted to know.

6i
"Thursday," I told him.
	"Today is Thursday," said the doctor. I had lost track of the calendar.
"Next Thursday," I said coolly.
	The more contact I had with the man, the less I liked him. He disliked us even more. I was wondering how all this would end when suddenly I heard my name called. Two men came running after me. I was wanted in the office, urgent! Emergency!
	I ran to the office. I found two civilians with the doctor and they rose when I entered. One was a portly, older man, with a handle-bar mustache, dressed in black with a heavy golden chain across his vest, the President of the Town Council of Siofok. The other was the Town Clerk of Siofok, in Hungary the highest executive official after the Mayor. He was around forty with a blond English mustache, his hair parted in the middle. His clothes looked very elegant and expensive for the Town Clerk of a small town. He was very pale and very excited. He did most of the talking while the other one just sat, pulling and twirling his thick mustache and nodding in assent.
	They needed help at once, desperately. Siofok, only twelve miles away, was in revolt!
62
9 91
	LCJ SI0F0K was the largest town in that Lake Balaton area, a famous summer resort surrounded by a belt of smaller villages inshore, with a permanent population of a few thousand. (Less than a year later, it was this town where Admiral Horthy set up his headquarters to organize his march on Budapest.)
	Trouble had been building up in Sjofok ever since the revolution broke out in Budapest and was about to reach its culmination that evening. The revolution had raised the pent-up discontent and misery of the war in that town to a point of explosion.
	Even before the revolution the people blamed their privations on the Town Clerk and members of the Town Council. They attributed the meagerness of war assistance to the families of the soldiers, the inadequacy of war pensions for war widows and orphans to bribery, graft, and corruption on part of the public officials. The officials, and the Town Clerk in particular, were accused of taking bribes to keep the rich exempt from draft; of favoritism; of forcing wives and daughters of absent soldiers to submit to their lust. When the Town Clerk talked about that, he became even more nervous, patting his hair, clearing his throat, pleading with his eyes the absurdity of those charges. The town officials had also been accused of extortion and other misuse of their official powers. Since all governmental decrees, all measures for the sacrifices demanded by the war, such as tightening of rationing, came down to the Town Council, the Mayor, and the Town Clerk for execution, they became the natural focus of 63
all accumulated hatred, and now, they were the targets for revenge.
	The early signs of impending trouble appeared trivial. The grumbling grew louder and became more ominous. Next the peasants and laborers stopped taking their hats off to their betters, they would look away or, worse still, brazenly and defiantly stare straight at them.
	The next stage started when a woman waiting in line for her war-assistance payment became disorderly, insulting, and even abusive. When the Town Clerk told her to quiet down or he would hold up her payment, someone in the crowd yelled out: "Wait until my husband gets back from the front, he'll take care of you and the rest of you almighty potentates." That started a demonstration of wild curses and foul abuse. The women tried to crowd into his office and the two town constables had a most difficult time before they could restore order.
	Shortly afterward, several large homes and summer residences in the surrounding area were looted. The number of those lootings had increased in the past days, since the first few ex-soldiers had made their way home from the front.
	Just two days previously the Clerk of a near-by village had been seized in his office by a bunch of wild women assisted by some returned soldiers and other trouble-makers. They had stripped the Clerk naked, hung the village drum around his neck, and then forced him to parade down the village street, to beat the drum and cry out, in mockery of official announcements:
	"I, the Village Clerk, officially announce by order of the higher authorities that I am a crook, a cheat and a no-good whoremaster."
	He was jeered, spit upon, and made to repeat that announcement several times before they would let him go. He fled the village that night and was given shelter by the Siofok Town Clerk until he departed for Budapest.
	That very night the military storeroom at the railway depot 64
in Siofok was broken into and stripped bare of all blankets, boots, army uniforms, rations, and other equipment. Luckily no weapons had been stored there. A large mob participated in that looting. Simultaneously, an imposing home of a wealthy Budapest family had been set on fire to divert attention from the looting.
	The previous day the Siofok Town Council had sent a delegation to Szekesfehervar, the largest town and military base in the area to ask for emergency aid. But the authorities had been unable to assist them, they themselves lacked sufficient forces to assure their own public safety.
	When the delegates had returned empty-handed this morning they were met by a jeering, hooting crowd shouting threats and insults.
"Where are the bayonets, your excellencies?"
"The Red Rooster will fly tonight!"
"Your feet will be dancing in the air after dark."
	Someone threw a rock through the Mayor's window, frightening him so badly that he had fled the town. Having heard that a strong military force was stationed in this sanatorium the Town Clerk and the President of the Town Council decided, in desperation, to try their luck here. They needed help at once, they implored.
	The Town Clerk was talking in jerky sentences, unable to stand or sit still for a moment, twirling his mustache with twitchy fingers, mopping his brow, pulling at his fawn-colored vest. The doctor had caught his panic and became twitchy too, his face turned ashen, his breath was forced out loud from his open mouth. The President of the Council just sat, fat thighs wide apart, his head bobbing up and down in assent.
	I was eager to help. I told the Clerk that although I had a force of only twelve men, they were well armed and disciplined, that I was confident we could handle the situation.
	The Town Clerk became despondent; twelve men were nowhere near enough to deal with that mob. I insisted we could do

65
it. I was a soldier and it was my duty to restore order in accordance with the Articles of War concerning Domestic Uprisings. Besides, it sounded thrilling.
	The doctor cut in unexpectedly. He vehemently asserted he would not let us go; we had been assigned to him to guard his sanatorium l That amazed me. After all his complaints I expected him to be glad to see us depart. Personally, I was e*ager to leave and told the doctor that the safety of the town of Siofok was of far greater importance than his sanatorium. The doctor was adamant. He insisted since he was paying us out of his own pocket we were under his orders and would have to stay with him.
	The Council President now spoke up for the first time and wanted to know how much the doctor was paying us. I told him the doctor was paying the new army rate, xo kronen a day per man, 30 kronen for me as an officer.
	"The Town of Siofok will triple that," he said, looking at the Town Clerk who eagerly assented.
	I thought that exceedingly generous of them. I had no understanding then what had prompted that generosity. They knew what I did not, that the country was then in an actual state of anarchy, and in their eyes we were a group of mercenaries whose allegiance could be bought by the highest bidder. Had I guessed that, I would have walked out right then. I was motivated solely by a blind sense of duty to establish law and order. The sanatorium did not need us. Siofok, a town faced by immediate revolt, did. I told the doctor to pay us off, assured him he could count on our aid any time he needed it, and went out to get the men ready.
	The men listened to me in silence. Surprisingly, my indignation failed to communicate itself to them. When I informed them about that challenge to law and order, and when I spoke of our great opportunity to uphold the honor of our arms, they stood impassive, manifesting a singular lack of interest in this new 66
mission. I sensed I would have to find a new approach. While I was thinking about that I casually mentioned the triple pay. This brought an immediate change of attitude.
	"Thirty kronen a day!" one of them exulted. "We'll clean that town up with a toothbrush for that!"
	It was settled. We got our gear and I paraded the men. Their sufficiency in arms, their erect military bearing, cheered the Town Clerk and the President of the Council visibly. The daily drill had transformed them into a proud force as they stood at stiff attention for inspection. It was agreed that the Town Clerk and the Council President would drive on ahead and we would be following them in three carts borrowed from the doctor.
	The doctor paid the men off dourly. When it came to paying me he said he had run out of cash, he would send on my pay to me in Siofok.
I believed him!
67
El 91 10 ti WHEN we got near Siofok, I told the drivers to take us to the rear of the Town Hall and stop a block away. It was close to seven by then and it was dark. We weren't hungry. The men had scrounged enough bread, hard sausage, smoked Hungarian bacon from the help in the Doctor's kitchen to have our fill on the way over. When we got to within fifty yards of the rear of the Town Hall, we got off, brushed the straw off our uniforms and I had the sergeant line the men up. The street was dark. There seemed to be some light in the square in front of Town Hall and a murmur was rising from that direction.
	My plan was to show maximum strength, I explained to the men. We were to march into the square in a double file, but stretched out in length to give us a column twenty yards long. We were to enter in parade step, rifles at ready, bayonets fixed, then deploy into a long skirmish line in front of Town Hall. By the time we had that all straightened out a small crowd had collected, gaping at us in silence, and more people were hurrying toward us. It was time. I drew my saber and commanded in loud parade drill voice:
"Attention! Fix bayonets! Rifles at ready!"
	The movements were executed with precision. The daily drills did prove effective.
"Forward, march!"
	The cobblestones resounded under the parade steps. We rounded the Town Hall and marched on to the square, the people scampering out of our way to clear space for us. We 68
deployed in front of the Town Hall. The line looked imposing. It reached almost from one corner of the building to the other.
	I faced the crowd, mainly women and old men with a sprinkling of soldiers in faded worn uniforms. Our uniforms were new.
I raised my saber, stood at attention, and called out:
	"In the name of the law I order you to clear this square at once and disperse to your homes." It was from the manual, except I left "the King" out before "law."
Nobody moved. There was silence.
Suddenly someone shouted:
	"Tin Soldiers. Go home! Nobody wants you here." That raised a few other shouts but not so loud and distinguishable.
"Who said that?" I challenged.
	A huge man in a torn army blouse stepped forward. There was a loud murmur of approval from the crowd.
"Tell them, Steve," a voice encouraged him.
He walked forward and faced me.
"What if I said it?" he challenged in a loud truculent voice.
"You are under arrest," I snapped.
"On whose orders?" he jeered.
	I motioned to the sergeant. He stepped forward, raised his rifle and brought the steel butt down full force on the soldier's head. The man collapsed. Women screamed. The crowd edged back.
	"Anyone else care to say anything?" My voice sounded very shrill.
Nobody did. A couple of women started crying.
	"I give you one minute to disperse or we'll fire," I warned, my voice pitched very high in excitement. The crowd broke and hurried off, the last ones breaking into a run.
	Only then did I take a look at the man on the ground. He was gasping for breath with a snoring sound and blood was running down his face. I was suddenly struck with remorse.
69
That man might die! Everything on the square had come off as I had anticipated, but it had not occurred to me that someone might be killed. The Town Clerk and other civilians now came running out of the Town Hall, all excited, all of them talking to me at once. I did not hear what they were saying, I couldn't tear my eyes off that bleeding man. Finally I told them:
	"Get a doctor! That man is hurt! Take him inside and bandage him!"
	He was carried inside and I followed him in. They put him in a cell and somebody started to bandage his head. Everybody was crowding around and you couldn't move in that small cell. I sent a civilian to tell the sergeant to send me a guard, told everybody to clear out, instructing the guard to stay with the man in the cell. I left with the civilians who took me to the Council Room.
	The Council Room was in a hubbub. I was escorted to a seat next to the Council President and we all sat down. There must have been nearly twenty civilians around the table, all older men, older than my father. They looked rich, they wore thick golden watch chains, heavy rings, dark heavy clothes of expensive material. A big coal stove was burning in the center.
	It did not look at all like what I had imagined a council meeting would be. The Councilmen appeared overexcited, talking in overloud tones, practically shouting. They acted scared. Finally the Town Clerk quieted them and made a short speech. He said that for the time being things were safe and described how we had dispersed the mob. When he mentioned me they all clapped their hands and shouted "bravo," which embarrassed me. The Town Clerk then said that they were there to decide what to do next, how to keep the mob in its place, and asked for proposals.
	A number of them spoke at once. A big red-faced man kept yelling, "We have to teach them a lesson, a lesson they'll never forget, by God!" They all agreed with that and then one of them asked, "What kind of a lesson? And how?"

70
	The red-faced man, he owned a large livestock farm just outside of Siofok I was told, had the answer.
	"We got a prisoner, the leader of the mob. Let's take and hang him. That will teach them the lesson they need, teach them to stay away from people's property and steal their pigs and livestock."
	A few people shouted their assent. The others suddenly turned very quiet. That was an altogether new idea. I felt scary.
	The Town Clerk then turned to me and asked me directly what my idea was on the subject. The question caught me unawares, I never had thought I had anything to do with that.
	They were all staring at me waiting for my answer. I pictured the man lying on the ground with blood all over his face, his breathing so strained, and I became still more scared. I had not meant for the sergeant to club him over the head with a rifle butt. All I had intended was to put him under arrest so that the rest of the crowd would then disperse, and now they wanted to hang him.
The silence was stretching.
	"What do you propose to do, Commander?" the Town Clerk prompted me again.
	"Military guards can't hang people," I finally managed to bring out. "They can only fire at mobs when they don't obey commands, or oiler resistance." I went on to explain the military rules relating to mobs and domestic disorders. As I spoke, my confidence returned. I was citing the manual which I knew by heart and the words came out fluently, allowing me to think ahead while I spoke. They listened intently.
	I explained that in order to make those people respect authority we had to demonstrate to them they had to obey and couldn't get away with breaking the law. I proposed that next morning we make a house-to-house search and confiscate all military property looted from the depot. They cheered that. I also proposed that we patrol the streets once in the morning, once in

7'
the afternoon, and twice in the evening from dark until ten o'clock. By then most people would be in bed.
	They liked all but the last part. They wanted to have the patrol out all night.
	That was not practical. I told them I couldn't divide my men. A two-man patrol wouldn't look too formidable. The guard had to stay together because as a unit, even if they were not out on the street, they constituted a strong armed force which was more than the mob could expect to cope with, and the mob would be aware of that. Besides, the men had to have their sleep and rest.
	They heard me out but they still insisted on an all-night patrol. That gave me an idea.
	"Let's organize a civilian patrol out of you men and I will assign two of my men to lead you. Then the guard will still be kept together as a strong reserve."
	They finally agreed. I asked the Town Clerk to call together next afternoon all those who would want to serve on the patrol, bringing whatever weapons were available in town-shotguns, pistols, etc.-and we would organize them.
	They assigned a large room right in Town Hall as quarters for my men and agreed to supply them mattresses and three free meals daily, while I was to be the guest of the town and provided with a luxury room and everything else I desired, gratis, in the best hotel in town. By the time the meeting adjourned everybody was cheerful. They came up to me, shook my hands, clapped me on the back just as if I were one of them. I did not feel that way. I was not fully at ease with them.
	I went outside and told the men about the arrangements. They liked it. We went to the designated hotel and the men all had a fine meal, each ordering whatever he wanted. They were even served a spriccer each, wine with soda. Afterwards they got their mattresses, toted them over to the Town Hall, and settled down.
	I told the sergeant to take the patrol through the town later that night and to make plenty of noise so the people would know

72
the town was being patrolled. Since it was late in November and very cold, I decided not to station a guard outside the Town Hall, but to post one inside the door, relieved every two hours. That was most satisfactory with the men and it was a sound arrangement, for there was no danger of attack.
	Next I went to see the prisoner. His head had been bandaged and the blood washed off his face but he was still unconscious and breathing very hard. It made me feel uneasy; I was scared that he would die.
	My assigned hotel was close by. A couple of the Councilmen were in the restaurant and they invited me over. I did not feel like eating and they treated me to drinks. I soon felt woozy. I excused myself, went to my room, undressed, and went to bed.
	I couldn't have been asleep long when a persistent knock at my door woke me. I grabbed my pistol and opened the door. It was the hotel porter with a weeping peasant woman dressed in black, a woolen shawl over her head and shoulders.
	"She insisted on seeing you, sir, and she wouldn't stay away," the porter explained apologetically. "I kept chasing her but she would keep coming back and crying so loud I was afraid she would wake the whole street. I thought it would be better for you to talk to her, sir."
	The woman, who stood there sniffling during the porter's speech, now burst into a loud wail.
	"What's going to happen to my husband? They told me he was dying. What's going to become of our poor orphans?" She was the wife of the prisoner. I felt very guilty. I got dressed in a hurry, told the woman to come with me, and led her to Town Hall. It took a lot of knocking before the guard opened the door. He was groggy with sleep.
	"I must have closed my eyes for a second," he apologized sheepishly. I took the woman to the cell with me.
	The man was still lying unconscious, his eyes half open but not seeing, his breath whistling through his parted lips.

73
	The woman let out a scream and threw herself on her husband, wailing "Stevie, oh Stevie, what did they do to you?" She wasn't directly referring to me, but the accusation struck home. I told the woman she could stay there with him as long as she wished. She paid no attention to me. She squatted down on the floor and gently lifted his injured head into her lap. I left them, walked back to the hotel, and went back to bed.
	The next morning I divided my men into four details and we made a house-to-house search in the section where the poor lived. We confiscated four cartloads of boots, blankets, underwear, uniforms, packs, and other army material.
	The people whose homes we searched were sullen. Many of them offered me bribes to let them keep the stuff, others muttered that we didn't care if they froze to death. I never anticipated that the job would turn out so distasteful. I did not relish confiscating those blankets and clothes, but of course it was looted stuff, it did not belong to them, it was government property.
	During the next three mornings we recovered enough army clothing and other property to nearly fill the box car in which I deposited them for eventual shipment to the Szekesfehervar Army Base. The three-man team I personally supervised recovered more looted material than the other three combined. I was proud of that achievement. I attributed it to the keenness of my eyes in spotting army equipment. It did not occur to me that the eyes of the others might have been just as keen or even keener, but more sympathetic to the poor, or that perhaps the other men were not as unresponsive to the offered bribes as I had been. I saw no need to have the freight car guarded, for the situation was well in hand. I had a stout padlock put on it and took the key with me.
	The organization of the civilian patrol did not prove difficult. About fifty men volunteered and they had eighteen shotguns and a few pistols among them. I divided them into three groups, the first one to patrol from six to eight in the evening, the second

74
from eight to ten, the third from ten to twelve. They were older men, the most substantial citizens in town.
	I assigned my men to lead them. Since there were not enough firearms to go around, some carried heavy canes.
	The patrol worked out fine. I checked every patrol before it went out, and we joked quite a bit. They were rather proud of themselves and talked and laughed loud when making their tours, which I liked. There were no disturbances.
	One of the Councilmen who was a processor and exporter of Hungarian paprika, took a particular liking to me. He took me home for dinner and introduced me to his daughter. Her name was Yolan but everybody called her Yolly. She was seventeen, a year younger than I, a very pretty girl with dimples in her cheeks, especially when she laughed. She told me she had a deep admiration for me. We fell in love at sight and I came to spend all my free moments in her house, particularly since her mother and father insisted that I make their house my home. Her mother would cook special dishes for me and bake my favorite cakes. Yolly and I got together every time I was free, and we kissed at every opportunity. That was about all we did; Yolly was not talkative, and I, too, preferred that to conversation.
	I also had a personal problem. The hotel where I was living had a blond cashier and she would slip into my room at night when she heard me coming home. I had a few bottles of liqueur in my room, a present from the hotel, and I would find her there half drunk. She smelled heavily of perfume and underarm perspiration. She had a big bust and she was full of smutty remarks. She would smooth my hair and make other advances. I did not like her and always had a difficult time sending her back into her own room. Once she even sneaked into my bed after I was asleep, but I did not enjoy it. From that night on she would make eyes at me during meals and ask me when would I be nice to her again. It was most annoying; since she was much older, I had to treat her with courtesy.
75
	Within a few days the situation in the town was fully under control. Most of the trains in the country had stopped running because of the coal shortage and the few that occasionally managed to come through had to use wood for fuel, which made them very slow. Because of that, only a few soldiers had succeeded in making their way back to the town from Italy. I spoke with some and they told me hair-raising tales of how the treacherous Slovenes and Croatians, who were part of Austro-Hungary until the time of their revolt, had mistreated them, their former comrades in arms; how they had robbed them of their clothing, even stealing the boots off their feet when they caught them asleep.
	The arrested man survived, and I gave his wife permission to take him home. Instead of showing hate, they both thanked me profusely for my kindness. The wife called innumerable blessings on my head, kissed my hand, and her children kissed the hem of my tunic. It was painfully embarrassing and I felt much relieved when they left.
	By the eleventh day life had become routine. Then a bit of trouble developed. Payday in the Hungarian Army was every ten days and the men expected to get paid. The Town Clerk informed them that the Council had decided that the President had lacked authority when he had offered them triple pay instead of the official ten kronen a day. The men demanded full pay as promised. The Town Clerk claimed the treasury was short of money. The men became threatening and for the first time disregarded me when I tried to calm them. I never liked to haggle about money, but I had to take the men's part. Finally they got paid in full, 300 kronen each man, which was a great deal of money at that time, more than most of them had ever seen in one lump sum, and they were very satisfied. Since the treasury was short I told the Clerk I was willing to wait for my 900 kronen. He was greatly pleased and thanked me for my co-operation. I was in no need of money, the hotel even supplied my cigarettes free.

76
	That night I had been long asleep when I was suddenly jarred awake by loud knocking and excited voices outside. I jumped out of bed and opened the door. I found three men there, all Councilmen, and they were trembling with fear. There was a riot at the depot. It was then past eleven o'clock.
"Where is the patrol?" was my first question.
They were the patrol, they quaked.
"Where are your arms?" I asked angrily.
	Their arms had not been turned over to them that night. When they assembled to relieve the second patrol, the sergeant had sent them home saying his men would take over the third patrol. They all went home except these three, who decided to have a few drinks first. On their way home they had witnessed the riot at the depot and ran right over to see me.
	That meant serious trouble. I threw my clothes on in such a hurry that I even left my saber belt off, just snatched up the holster with the pistol, and rushed toward the depot.
	It was quite a distance and I was out of breath by the time I reached the depot. The moon was bright and the platform in front of the freight car was dark with people, most of them women.
	The door of the freight car was wide open and two of the sergeant's cronies were busy passing blankets, boots, clothing to the people clamoring below. They had improvised an aisle by placing the massive railroad benches from the waiting room parallel to each other and the people had to pass through this to reach the open door of the freight car.
	I saw the sergeant standing on the first bench facing his third crony on the opposite bench. Their hands were full of bills, they were collecting money from the upthrust hands of the clamorous women before permitting them to pass through the aisle. The women were shrieking, pushing and pulling each other-it was a riot all right.
	I discovered the rest of my men on the fringe of the crowd. They were not party to that organized looting nor did they do
77
anything to interfere; they were just watching. They caught sight of me at the same time I noticed them.
	"Follow me." I motioned to them. As I saw them close up behind me, I drew my pistol and went out to the platform. I was boiling mad.
"Stop it," I commanded. "Halt!"
	Every face turned toward me. The two soldiers on the freight car froze. The crowd gave way. It was very still.
I walked over to the sergeant.
"You are under arrest!"
	The sergeant grabbed for his rifle and cursed. "Get out of here or I'll kill you."
My finger tightened on the trigger. I was ready to shoot him.
	"Attention!" I commanded in a fury. The other three men with him snapped to. The sergeant did not.
There was a fraction of hesitation.
	"To foot!" I ordered with my pistol extended straight, aimed at his stomach.
	The sergeant executed the command. His rifle butt made a loud bang on the wooden bench as he brought it down to position.
	"You four men are under arrest." I was still furious. "Take his rifle," I said to the corporal with me. The drilling paid off. The sergeant turned over his rifle and we marched the four of them back to Town Hall. By then the platform was empty, the crowd had scurried off.
	We marched them down to a cell and locked them in. I told the corporal that from then on he was in charge and that I wanted a guard over that cell all through the night. Then I returned to the hotel.
	On the way back I felt strangely empty. My mind couldn't concentrate. I went to bed, closed my eyes, but I couldn't sleep. I kept seeing that platform, the women milling around, the sergeant with his rifle pointing at me from less than three yards'

78
distance, ready to 1l me. That image swirled round and round and suddenly I started to tremble. I wanted to stop shaking but I couldn't. I felt my whole body go rigid and I bounced up and
down uncontrollably, setting the bed vibrating. Then I began to shiver again until I climbed out of bed, which stopped it. Shock has strange effects.
11 1!:i
II 1 THE next morning I went over to the Town Hall early. No one was standing guard and the cell was empty. The sergeant and his three cronies were gone and two more men with them. I discovered that a few cabinets had been broken open and I found chisel marks even on the town safe, but it hadn't been entered.
	I walked over to the depot. The freight-car door gaped wide open, the broken lock hanging from it. The car had been stripped bare. That must have been done after I left, later in the night.
	I went back to the Town Hall. It was still early but a number of Councilmen were already there busily discussing the events of the night before. I stopped near the door, unnoticed. One of the Councilmen who had called me from my hotel was holding down the center, describing the scene with wide gestures and great detail, embroidering it with touches that were new to me. I came out very well in his story, or so I thought, yet some of the others were saying that I was to blame, I was responsible for the men, I should have had better control over them, the sergeant and his friends were obviously bandits, look how they tried to break even the safe open! How could an officer of judgment have picked such men who were obviously habitual criminals, to guard people's life and property? Well, after all, he is only a young boy! True, yet it was like entrusting wolves to guard a flock of sheep, and so on. I walked away.
	I went to my remaining six men, discussed with them what 80
had happened. They were evasive and I did not press them. I had them clean and oil all rifles including those the sergeant and the others had left behind. I took a rag and, for the first time, helped them with the task; it gave me something to do.
	After lunch I went up to my room to sleep. I felt very low, a new mood for me. I slept a few hours and then went to see Yolly. Her father greeted me, but not in his usual hearty "Come in, come in, glad to see you, make yourself at home" manner. He was rather curt, said he had to go back to his office, and left right away.
	Yoily was not in the parlor. Her mother told me she was studying in her room. They had news that the schools would be reopening soon, as soon as they could get in a supply of coal. I told her I would wait and sat around playing with the dog. Yolly did not come out of her room so finally I got up and said it was time for me to go. Her mother did not ask me to stay for supper, nor had she offered me some of her cake, as she always used to.
	I went out and passing by the window I saw Yolly studying under the kerosene lamp on her table. I rapped on the window and she came over and opened it. We talked but neither of us had anything much to say. She told me she had forgotten all she had learned in school and she had to catch up. She also said that her parents thought we were spending too much time together and it would have to stop, it might lead to talk. That was peculiar, for her parents had been practically pushing us on each other, but I did not mention that to her. She said her room was getting cold with the window open. I said "Au reuoir!" arid helped her close the window.
	It was by then nearly six o'clock and dark. I went back to Town Hail. I found a captain there talking with the Town Clerk, the Council President, and a few other people.
	When they saw me come in the group broke up, the Councilmen saying loudly to each other, too loudly I thought, that it was time they got home for supper, the wife was raising holy 8x
hell about their always being late; then they left, shaking hands with me on their way out.
	The captain, who had been standing aside during this time, now came over to me. I saluted him and he returned the salute. He introduced himself, he was the son of one of the Councilmen. He had just returned from the hospital that morning, he had been wounded in the arm by shrapnel on the Isonzo front. He was very friendly and told me from what he had heard I did a splendid job of restoring order, he was personally proud of it. He then casually added that my grave responsibilities were over, that he was taking over Public Safety beginning next morning. He told me to supervise the patrols as usual for that night, next morning he wanted a full report from me, and then we would discuss what would follow.
	I left him, checked the patrol which was about to go out, and went back to the hotel for supper. After supper I took the second patrol out myself. The townspeople making up the patrol were overpolite. They made attempts to joke with me but it sounded forced. After we completed the first round, I left them and went back to the hotel.
	The cashier was manicuring her nails and she gave me her usual wide smile with her gold teeth flashing. I asked the headwaiter for a bottle of cognac and then went over to her, invited her to come to my room as soon as she was free, we would get drunk and have a real party.
	She laughed. She was pleased but she couldn't, not that night. She had a date with the captain.
	I went to my room, took a couple of drinks out of the bottle, then a couple more, and went to bed. I felt very much alone.
	The next morning I walked over to the depot and found a freight train standing there headed north, the direction of my home town. It was trying to get up steam and the engineer told me they would leave when and if they could load up with enough wood.
82
	I went over to Town Hall to see the Town Clerk. He was busy and for the first time he made me wait. I watched him enter items in a ledger for a while, then touched him on the shoulder and told him I wanted to speak to him officially, I was
going home. He was polite, but did not act surprised. He told me the town and the citizens would miss me. He wished me good luck, he did not ask me to stay on.
I asked him for my pay. He said that if the Mayor were in
town I would have no difficulty, he could then pay me on the spot, but unfortunately, the Mayor was still absent. He couldn't
pay me on his own authority; as commander of the guard I was a sort of town official in charge of public safety; my pay would have to be taken up by the Town Council which would meet
formally three weeks later. However, he did not anticipate my having too much difficulty with them.
	I told him there was a freight train waiting at the depot, I needed my money at once for I was leaving on that train. He
was very sorry, very sorry indeed, he brushed his mustache with a small brush, it was indeed most regrettable, but he personally
couldn't do anything about my pay without authorization. He asked me to leave my home address, they would mail my money to me there. I believed him and gave him my father's address.
He then offered me a personal loan of twenty kronen as a friend, out of his own pocket. I had 990 kronen coming to me. I declined the loan. We shook hands and I left.
	I went to say good-bye to the men. They were sorry to see me go and they showed it. We shook hands all around. I took two blankets off one bed because the weather was very cold and I had no overcoat. I noticed a piece of hard sausage on the table
and asked the men if it was all right for me to take that along. It was more than all right with them. They even dug up another
piece and two hunks of bread. I took a pack, folded one of the blankets and put it into the pack with the food, and threw the other blanket around my shoulders. That did not look military

83
but I did not care. I made a present of my saber to the corporal and left the pistol and holster on the table with instructions to give them to the captain. That was my demobilization. I was through with the army!
	I walked over to the station with the pack hanging from my left arm, on the side where my saber used to be. It felt strange walking without the heavy saber, my right foot would still automatically make that small circular kick that kept the saber from tripping one up. My right hand was clutching the blanket around my neck, for my throat felt sore. My body was hot and I was sneezing, my nose was beginning to get runny. I felt a bad cold coming on. I had an extra pair of trousers and some underwear in the hotel but did not bother to go back for them.
	White steam was rising from the funnel of the locomotive. We ought to be able to start soon, said the engineer. The fireman said I could travel with them on the engine, it would be warmer. There was no caboose. I got in the cab with them but there was no room to sit down, I had to stand. The warm fire felt good but my knees began to tremble, I felt weak and wanted to lie down. I got off the cab, went to the first box-car but, strangely, I couldn't make the jump. I had to clamber up slowly, like an old woman, and crawl inside. I was really weak. I struggled with the door for quite a while to close it behind me. I finally managed it by pushing with both my hands and shoulder. I pulled the blanket out of the pack, laid my pack in the corner for a pillow, rolled myself in one blanket and spread the other over me. The boards were hard but it felt very good to be lying down. Never before had I needed to lie down so badly. I was feverish. I did not hear the train start.
	When I awoke, it was very dark inside the car and it was also dark through the crack outside. I was very hot and thirsty but I had forgotten to bring along water. I had the sausage and bread but did not feel like eating and went back to sleep. I kept waking and dozing off; my feet were icy cold yet my body was very hot and I kept throwing my blanket off and then pulling
it back, over and over again. Sometimes it was light through the crack, sometimes it was dark; when I was awake I kept staring at the crack near the door but I was not thinking of anything, just staring.
	A long, long time later I woke again. I was freezing all over, my head was swollen, fiery pains were stabbing through my feet. The train was not moving. I groped for my blankets and my pack, they were gone. Somebody must have stolen them from under me, leaving the door half open. I crawled to the door on all fours and saw we were in a freight yard. I had a difficult time letting myself down from the car. When my feet touched ground, they wouldn't support me and I fell. I raised myself up, but it took time-my legs were numb and very stiff, they did not feel like my own legs at all. The sky was pinkish gray in the early dawn.
	Another freight train was getting up steam. I hobbled over and asked the engineer where he was heading. He told me to Gyor, which was my hometown. Resting every few steps, I made my way to one of the cars and after a few starts managed to pull myself up. I was hot and shivering. I did not have the strength to push the door shut so I crawled to the farthest corner and rested. After a while I sat up and leaned against the wall, took my shoes off, and began rubbing my feet. My feet didn't feel the skin of my hands, only the pressure. We traveled for a long, long time and I kept massaging my feet endlessly, over and under, over and under, back and forth. I also had to keep my body rocking forward and back to keep it from freezing, it was that cold. When we reached Gyor, it was evening. I was feverish again, just dimly conscious. I rolled out of the car and dragged myself to a fiacre for the ride home. The family all crowded around and I asked what day it was. It was Wednesday, early in December.
I had been on the road three days.
	My folks put me right to bed and it took more than a week before I got some of my strength back. It was the Spanish flu,
	84	85
the Doctor said, marveling that I had survived that trip. My feet were frostbitten, so were my nose and ears, but they were getting better.
	When I was able to get up and move around I found I was penniless. I hadn't received my pay in Kobanya, I had forgotten to collect my pay from the Food Ministry, I hadn't received my pay from the Doctor in the sanatorium, I hadn't received my pay from the Town Council in Siofok. I should have had well over I,2oo kronen, big money those days. I sure was an idiot. I had to ask my father for spending money although the family was very hard up because of the inflation. He gave me two kronen, then seeing the disappointed look on my face, he raised it another krone. He couldn't really afford it.
	I wrote to the Town Council of Siofok for my money twice. I never received an answer. I did not bother to write to the Doctor, I knew the score there. But a town . . . ? A town council was a sort of government, it shouldn't have acted that way, a government shouldn't cheat a person.
	A few nights later I was late coming in, it must have been close to eleven o'clock. I took my shoes off in the vestibule and sneaked in on stocking feet to avoid being detected. My father woke up, he was a light sleeper, and gave me a terrific dressing down. He wanted no son of his to become a vagabond, squandering his father's hard-earned money, staying out that late at night at his age.
	I slunk off to bed, feeling very wronged. My father was unjust, totally lacking in understanding. I felt very sorry for myself, my eyes were moist, my throat was choking up. My father was too strict with me, he was too old-fashioned, he wanted me to stay home all evening, my eyes had tears in them by then. I hugged my youngest brother for love and comfort, he was sharing the bed with me. I thought how unfair my father was and I began
to cry.
	I was back home, again a child. 86
IL id As soon as I got well I went to Budapest and in January, 1919 enrolled in the Medical School of the Royal University of Budapest. I also obtained a job with the Gabor Institute, a private school for the problem children of the wealthy. Some of the pupils were backward, some came from broken homes or were unwanted, others were the unmanageable, the kind no other school in the country would take. I was hired
to teach mathematics and physical culture after my classes at the University, in exchange for room and board plus a nominal pay. Since jobs were almost impossible to find, it was a most fortunate arrangement.
	I did not relish my job. The children were spoiled and in general looked down on their tutors who, as they well knew, came from poorer families.
	One of my colleagues, a brilliant chemistry major just about to receive his degree, advised me to be deferential in my relationship with the boys or I wouldn't last long, because Dr. Gabor, the head of the institute, would invariably side with his wealthy pupils in any dispute.
	That attitude, as I very soon found out, presented a grave problem in discipline. The boys acted as they pleased, studied or not, behaved in a loud and disrespectful manner. There was a great deal of masturbation in the dormitories, also some evi-
dence of homosexual practices, and the tutors had to be on the lookout for that.
87
	It was quite an ordeal. Attending classes at the University mornings and part of the afternoons, teaching until seven, supervising the dormitories until ten in the evening, then doing my own studying far into the night, was beginning to tax me. I became irritable and took a firm hand with the boys. This was immediately reported to Dr. Gabor who called me on the carpet. He was a pompous man of very short stature with a grotesquely outsize head on his scrawny neck, the largest head I had seen on a man. He censured me severely, stating that unless I learned how to use more tact and diplomacy I would not last long with his institute.
	Since I needed the job badly I gave that problem serious study. Most of the trouble originated with the older boys. They were the leaders and the younger ones simply followed their example or even tried to outdo it. The next day I changed the physical culture routine by instituting wrestling. Wrestling was not an accepted form of exercise; it was considered an undignified activity fit only for street urchins. I even added an extra twist-ending the sessions with a controlled free-for-all. Each day I would choose five or six of the most obnoxious boys whom I wanted to see roughed up and set them on each other.
	It worked for a while. The boys took to it and I took good care to prevail upon their manly pride to keep them from complaining. They did a far better job of beating each other up than I would have dared to do, yet my standing with the boys improved. All went well until one of my colleagues reported that I was teaching the children ungentlemanly deportment, and Dr. Gabor called me into his office again. He told me curtly to discontinue wrestling at once, impatiently rejecting my argument that the pupils, by then, actually enjoyed it and that it improved their dormitory and classroom behavior. He told me acidly he was not entering into a pedagogic discussion with me, he was telling me what to do. He added ominously that he was too busy that evening but would see me the next day. This disturbed me. 88
I liked my classes at the University; losing my job would present a serious problem.
	At ten that evening, after the dormitories were finally in silence, I decided to take a walk. It was against the rules of the Gabor Institute for tutors to go out nights without permission, but since I was in trouble anyway, I did not care.
	When I reached Erzsbet Boulevard, that broad thoroughfare usually teeming with life seemed quite deserted and this puzzled me. Although I seldom read the newspapers I knew there was a streetcar strike on-I had had to walk to the University that day. I also knew a printers' strike was on, that no newspapers had been published, and that there was some kind of trouble between the Social-Democrats and Communists.
	I knew only in a vague way who the Socialists were, they were the workers in the trade unions. Of the Communists I knew even less. I remembered having read some time back that there were thirty-seven of them, all former prisoners of war who had returned from Russia with a man named Bela Kun who was their leader. Ever since then they had been making trouble for the Social-Democrats. Bela Kun and some of his friends had been arrested and beaten by the police. They were still in jail as far as I knew-not that I cared one way or another. Politics did not interest me, I had my own problems.
	I was standing in front of a large caf trying to puzzle out why there were so few people around when I saw a straggling line advancing in the center of the deserted boulevard carrying crudely lettered placards which read:
"Long Live the Dictatorship of the Proletariat!"
"Long Live Bela Kun."
	The marchers were evidently factory hands, poorly dressed, rather scrawny and underfed. I counted them, there were nineteen, five of them women. I was curious. I went over to the nearest man in the line and fell in step with him. He was an undersized fellow wearing a checkered cap. I asked him what 89
they were doing. He looked me over carefully and then said: "Demonstrating for the proletarian dictatorship." I wanted to know where they were going.
"To the Eastern Railway Depot, to get arms!"
That interested me.
	"Why would they give you arms? Have you an authorization?"
	"They will have to give them to us, we are in power now. The proletariat in power is armed!" he declaimed.
	I became even more interested. I knew what dictatorship was, Sulla in Rome had been a dictator. But I was not quite sure what proletariat meant, although lately I had come across the word frequently in the newspapers, also on some posters. He explained to me. He was a proletarian. He was a factory worker. Proletariat meant all the workers together who had nothing to lose but their chains and the whole world to gain. He said I was not a proletarian, I was a student. When I objected that I was also working, I was tutoring, he said that I was of the intelligentsia. The intelligentsia were not much good, but students were allies. The intelligentsia could be allies, too. I could be a double ally but still no proletarian.
	Hearing our conversation a couple of other people moved to my other side so that I was no longer walking on the outside but near the middle of the column. Every time they saw a group of people on the sidewalk they shouted their slogan and so did 1-it was fun. They called to the people to join us, but few of them did. Most of them hurried on ahead, some even turned back abruptly.
	It was a long march to the Eastern Depot and I got a bit of education. Bela Kun had been released from jail and the Communists and Social Democrats were now the government. Count Mihly Krolyi, President of the Republic, had abdicated and turned the government over to them.
"Who is going to be the president now? Bela Kun?" I asked.

9
That was a childish question. There was to be no president any more, only the proletarian dictatorship which was much better, and Bela Kun was to be the dictator. Everything would be taken away from the rich, who were capitalist exploiters, their factories, land, castles and everything, and divided among the poor. That sounded fine to me but I did not believe t. I asked many other questions but most of the answers were vague. I concluded they were only guessing, they didn't know themselves. After all, they were only ignorant workers. How could they possibly know?
	(It took me more than a decade to realize how incredibly wrong I was to feel so superior to them-in attributing their inability to answer my questions clearly to their lack of formal education. They could not possibly have given me the right answers because nobody knew the right answers then. Even in this nuclear age, when the physical survival of all mankind depends on our finding the right answers, those answers are still shrouded in the mist of the future.)
	After we reached the Eastern Depot we milled around for quite a while until a couple of the proletarians finally located the railway official who had the key to the arsenal. They surrounded him, argued with him, but he refused to yield until one of the women snatched the huge key ring out of his hand.
	It took time to find the right key to fit the lock and to open it. There were no more than a few dozen rifles inside. I looked around for a carbine but there was none, so I took one of the rifles. There was no ammunition in the room. They looked funny, those proletarian men and women carrying their rifles clumsily, like picks and shovels. I was still wearing my old army uniform but with the insignia removed, for I had no civilian clothes. The rifle looked good on me and it also felt good.
	After we got ourselves armed nobody knew what to do next, or had any suggestions, so we decided to disperse and go home.
	When I got to the gate of the Gabor Institute it was nearly three A.M. I did not care, I was full of animation and not at
9i
all sleepy. I rang the bell, not apologetically and gently as usual but hard and loud, enjoying the clangor. After a while I heard Dr. Gabor inside angrily demanding to stop that noise, and wanting to know what was going on. He flung the door open shouting that he'd "teach . . ."
	Dr. Gabor glared at me in his long white nightshirt, shouting angrily, how did I dare come in at that hour of the night, waking up the entire school, who gave me permission to go out, on and on.
	I just stood there grinning and then brought my rifle smartly off my shoulder. Dr. Gabor's eyes bulged out in his grotesque head. He started to stutter.
"What ... What ... What's the meaning of this?"
	"Dictatorship of the Proletariat," I grinned. "It just broke out, a couple of hours ago."
	He swayed and I had to grab him or he would have fallen. He was one of the leaders of the moderate Liberal Party and, unlike me, he grasped the real meaning of that change in government instantly. The printers' strike had kept him from knowing the latest developments. He was all shaken up and I supported him to his room.
"Good night," he thanked me in a broken voice.
	In all the three months I had been working for him that was the first time he addressed me as "Mister"!
	Weeks passed. The Proletarian Dictatorship was developing turbulently yet I was untouched by it. I attended classes, worked in the Institute, studied, rising at six and getting to bed way past midnight, a routine that taxed me to the full leaving me no time or energy to take much interest in the events around me. Occasionally I yearned to share the exciting life some of my colleagues in the University seemed to be leading but no one approached me to draw me in and my time was far too occupied to enable me to seek contacts on my own. I read the newspapers

92
daily but in a superficial way; they were too full of meaningless political jargon and threats against unnamed counterrevolutionary elements to carry much interest for me. I failed to develop sympathy either for or against the Proletarian Dictatorship. Its promises failed to enthuse me; its threats carried no fear for me. The standing slogan displayed on posters everywhere affected me in a reverse way. They showed a steel-helmeted figure with a rifle on his shoulder and a hate-distorted face, pointing a menacing finger at the onlooker and threatening:
	"YOU counterrevolutionary slinking in the dark, TREMBLE!"
	I would salute the figure, give a mock shudder, wink at him, and depart whistling.
	When the Hungarian Soviet Government decreed a general draft of my age group I decided not to obey it and went home to Gyor. This made me a draft evader but I did not care. I was through with the army. My father was worried, however, and asked me to see his friend, Dr. Pathnyi, a professional army doctor with the rank of major, then automatically serving in the Red Army, to see if he could work out something for me. Dr. Parnyi asked me how much medical schooling I had had.
"Four months," I told him sheepishly.
	"Splendid!" exclaimed Dr. Parnyi. "I'll make you my assistant." The way he said it, service in the Red Army didn't rate high in his esteem, either.
	The next morning he gave me a white coat and introduced me to the comrade medical attendants as the "new doctor," his assistant. I escorted him to sick parade and he instructed me to observe him carefully. There were forty or fifty Red Army soldiers in the line, undressed to the waist. They would enter the office one by one, drop their pants, and recite their ailments. Dr. Par.nyi would have them open their mouths, stick their tongues out; he would look at the tongue, sometimes look into their throats, then hand them a pill.

93
	Every once in a while he would order a man to turn around, bend down and stretch his cheeks. He would then bend closer, take a look and exclaim triumphantly, "Syphilis." He would then call me over, tell me to take a look at the angry red growth in the anus, and remark proudly he could always detect secondary stage syphilis by a man's general appearance.
	After attending sick parade with him for three days Dr. Parnyi felt I had sufficient practice to be on my own. He turned medical inspection over to me with instructions to refer the seriously ill to him for treatment in the hospital.
	We had only four medications at our disposal. A white pill, calomel, which was a purgative; aspirin, a general cure-all; a gray pill, ipecac, an expectorant and emetic; and a yellow powder, quinine, for fever.
	I held sick parades daily, distributing the four medicines according to my judgment and sometimes depending on what supplies we had on hand. When we ran out of one pill I substituted another; it worked out the same. I also tried to diagnose secondary syphilis according to Dr. Parnyi's method, by picking a man at random and then taking a look. My score was low. I would mistake scabies, hemorrhoids, or even simple scratches for lues, Dr. Parnyi would inform me, sending the men back.
	From then on I quit that type of detailed examination. It wasn't aesthetic anyway. I would simply ask every man whether he had or had had syphilis and if the answer was affirmative I would send him to the venereal ward. This improved my score greatly. Dr. Parnyi was pleased with my progress and told me I had the makings of a good diagnostician. I accepted that praise with modesty.
	One morning when I appeared for my customary sick parade I found no one in line waiting for me. I finally located an attendant who told me that Bela Kun had resigned, the Soviet Dictator-

94
ship was over, that all the men, including the ward patients, had miraculously recovered and left for home.
I went home, too.
It did not affect me one way or another.
	After the fall of the Proletarian Dictatorship a number of workers were arrested. Since I did not know any of them that made little impression on me at first because neither I nor my family or friends were involved in any way. But when Admiral Horthy's White Army entered my town and the White Terror began in earnest my outlook changed completely.
	Gangs wearing white armbands roamed the streets dragging people off trains, out of their homes, or off their jobs on the merest suspicion of having been involved in Communistic, SocialDemocratic, or trade union activities, then brutally torturing, even murdering them. One young boy whom I knew personally had been taken to a concentration camp merely because he had joined the Cabinet Makers Union, although in that shop it was compulsory for all apprentices to join. When he was released four months later he was a cripple and it was said he had been castrated. I went to see him and he sobbed that it was true. He was then sixteen years old.
	The Horthy regime needed a scapegoat and, as usual in history, we Jews became it. We were being called unscrupulous finance capitalist exploiters and also Communists, both at the same time. We were accused of being responsible for the loss of the war; also for all the miseries suffered by the people because of the centuries-old feudal oppression. Anti-Semitism became the official policy of the government and Parliament was debating proposals ranging from the complete extermination of the Jews to the comparatively mild one of barring them from all jobs and professions and expropriating their property.
	In Gyor the Catholic Herald appeared under the standing banner headline:

95
WHAT ARE WE WAITING FOR? LET'S SETTLE
WITH THE JEWS!
	My father, who had received several offers before the war to go to the United States and another one right after the war, finally decided to pull up roots. The family emigrated to the United States in the fall of 1920. I stayed behind to finish medical
school but that proved impossible.
	Bands of young hoodlums armed with clubs, brass knuckles, and bikacsek (the Hungarian version of a blackjack, made of the carefully desiccated genitals of a bull), would burst into the classrooms of the University, demanding that each student stand up and "identify" himself.
	This "identification" was not a request for the showing of documents. It called for each male student to drop his trousers and expose his genitals for inspection, disregarding the presence of girl students. All those circumcised were then identified as Jews even though many had medical proof to the contrary, and they were mercilessly beaten by the thugs, mainly on their heads and genitals, crippling many of them for life.
	In my classes a large group of us, including many non-Jewish colleagues, got together and armed ourselves with short lengths of lead pipe and with brass weights appropriated from grocers' scales. When these roving bands would hit our own classroom, we would give battle royal. Desks would be overturned, chairs smashed, precious instruments destroyed, floors and walls splattered with blood. Our example spread to other classrooms, and finally the University had to be closed down and all classes abandoned.
	I went back to Gyor and spent my days in corroding idleness, staying in bed all morning and playing cards in the afternoon, until I felt my muscles grow flabby and my mind empty. To hell with becoming a doctor, I concluded, sold the family furniture, and booked passage to America.

96
	I arrived in New York on July i, 1921, and by the next day I had a job in a fur shop as a combination sweep-up man and errand boy. In Hungary I would sooner have starved than take such a humiliating job, akin to that of a stable boy, but here I was happy and proud. This was a republic and a democracy where each man was free and equal. This is where I belonged!
	Two days later a startling sound of explosions woke me out of my sleep. I listened intently, the firing seemed to have spread all over the city. I distinguished not only single shots but also a short burst of a machine gun in action. So it had reached even the United States! The revolution had come to New York.
	I threw my clothes on hurriedly and rushed out, wondering where could I get hold of a carbine. The streets were deserted, the stores, usually open by that time, were all closed. It was the revolution all right. There was nobody around except children. Naturally, there was no use asking them, they couldn't know. The firing sounded quite close and it was coming closer still.
	I was making my way toward the subway station when I saw a man emerging from there. I rushed over to him and asked him what was happening. He looked at me in obvious puzzlement, uneasy over my anxiety. I repeated my question very slowly to make sure he understood my heavily accented English and asked him where the main fighting was, what the revolution was about? He still did not comprehend. Just then there was a loud explosion right behind me and it made me jump.
"Didn't you hear that?" I yelled, exasperated.
	He looked at me, then threw his head back and roared, just roared with laughter.
It was the Fourth of July celebration.
97
., In




13 Ini WORKING in the fur shop was exciting. It was a sweatshop but I did not know that then. I worked a seventy-two hour, six-day week. My working day started at seven o'clock in the morning. The boss would come in ahead of me and after unhooking the Holmes Burglar Alarm System he would lay out the work. When I came in at seven, I would sweep the place and wet the skins for the cutters. The men started at eight, quit at five. Afterward I finished up after them, did whatever the boss told me to do, and left some time after seven in the evening. The boss would leave with me unless something went wrong with the Holmes system, which happened often. In that event, we would have to stay and wait until the Holmes men came, checked, and mended the break. Often that took until eight or later. On Saturdays the shop would close down at twelve but the boss and I would stay on. He liked to stay late and always found enough for me to do.
	My pay was $12 a week. My parents lived in Philadelphia then and I had taken a furnished room in New York with my cousin. He had arrived in America a few months ahead of me and he was also working in a fur shop, making the same money as I did. My uncle was a skin dealer and he had found his job for him also.
	We each paid four dollars a week for the room. Sixty cents of our pay went for carfare, $1.05 for cigarettes, $i.oo for laundry. That left us each $5.35 a week for food and all our other expenses. It worked out to 76 cents per day, 79 cents for Sunday, a holiday. It was very little, but we managed.

98
	Breakfast came to ten cents for a cup of coffee and two hard rolls. After a while we discovered a place where the cups were larger and the rolls the size of a fist.
	For lunch I would go to Max's Busy Bee on Sixth Avenue, right around the corner from the shop. They served a big fat hamburger on a big roll for five cents, which included the gravy. I did not ask what kind of meat they used. The burgers were big, the gravy was heavy, and I was always very hungry. I would have two of these hamburgers and a sweet roll with a dab of pink jelly on top. That feast set me back thirteen cents each day, but I considered it well worth the price. It was at Max's Busy Bee that I first discovered how inadequate was the conversational English I had taught myself from books before coming to America. I would ask the people standing at the counter alongside of me: "May I bother you for the salt cellar?" and they would just stare, uncomprehending. My cousin who was learning his English here finally told me how to say it in American.
	"Gimme de salt," he taught me. He was a good teacher. I had no more such troubles.
	For dinner, my cousin and I would usually splurge. We would buy two quarts of milk, two stale loaves of bread, and two full pounds of liverwurst, the cheapest meat by far and most delicious. That dinner would come to 3 cents each, leaving us with a surplus of eighteen cents daily for luxuries such as an occasional banana, for cultural needs such as a newspaper, or to be saved up for emergencies such as buying razor blades or handkerchiefs.
	I usually went through my entire pay but my cousin managed to save part of his. By the end of three weeks he had accumulated considerable capital. He wouldn't tell me how much but I suspected he had at least three dollars saved up. I envied him and made bitter reproaches to myself for being a wastrel, too selfindulgent for my own good. I knew I needed self-discipline and made resolve after resolve not to be such a spendthrift but I simply lacked the necessary firmness of character.
Of course, from time to time certain complicated borderline
99
cases would arise that made it difficult to decide what was the more economical practice to follow in this puzzling land. Take the case of the handkerchiefs.
	The air in all fur shops is full of flying hairs, a constant irritant to nostrils unaccustomed to it, as ours were, necessitating the use of an unusually large number of handkerchiefs. Our landlady did not allow us to wash them in our room and the laundry charged four cents apiece. So far, all good and well.
	However, peddlers would come around the fur market selling handkerchiefs for five cents each, six for a quarter. This posed a real dilemma. Laundering six soiled handkerchiefs cost twentyfour cents, while here were six brand new handkerchiefs for twenty-five cents, costing only a penny more. What was the economically sounder practice?
	My cousin decided to continue to have his laundered. A penny saved was a penny earned, a bird in the hand was worth two in the bush.
	To me, the latter analogue rested on a false premise. Birds fly away but handkerchiefs were solid, tangible objects which once bought became personal property, i.e., wealth. I decided on the long-range capital gain, buy new ones, save up the soiled.
	Life proved my cousin right. Months later when we decided to move from that place, I found my suitcases filled to overflowing with brand new but soiled handkerchiefs. It was either pack them or my clothes. One or the other had to be left behind, and of course the clothes won out. My capital accumulation was wiped out at one fell swoop-my first painful experience with that economic phenomenon termed "business cycle." My cousin who was secretly worried about my daily rising stock of handkerchiefs, now showed open relief. He was gracious enough to console me, however, by explaining:
	"One day you're up, the next day you're down. That's America."
100
.['+ 1J Tux shop was fun. It was hard work, manual labor, but I enjoyed it. When other new immigrants complained about their "degradation" and cried for their old life in the "old country," I treated them with contempt. My old life was all in the past, buried and forgotten. It was wonderful not to be idle, a pleasure to be working.
	Mr. Kourash, my boss, saw to it that this pleasure was prolonged. He kept me busy every minute of the day for the twelve hours I worked. Ours was a nonunion shop and I had to be all over the place helping everyone, cutters, operators, nailers, "working to their hand." Mr. Kourash was smart, said to have been in vaudeville in his youth, a fact which increased my respect for him. He was far above the workers in his shop in brains, also in schooling. Most of the men in the shop could hardly write, some did not even know how to keep their tallies accurate. One thing in particular astonished me. There would be constant arguments between the boss and the cutters as to whether a certain skin was or was not large enough for the given pattern. The boss would usually insist it was, the cutters would argue it was not. To me there was no basis for all that heated dispute, a few quick measurements with the ruler would give the total square inches in both skin and pattern. When I would demonstrate that, the one in the wrong would look at me with mistrust, being ignorant of the most elementary trigonometry. Of course I would be proven right every time by actual results, which made them suspicious of me. After all, I was a greenhorn, certainly no fur-

JOT
rier, so how could I foretell with certainty how much one can get out of a skin, when that ability supposedly required years of practical experience.
	Within a few weeks I had my own chores sufficiently well systematized to find time to assist the nailers in their work. We really needed another nailer but Mr. Kourash would not hire one, preferring to press for higher production. The nailers produced between forty to fifty collars each. Soon I nailed an additional 15 to 20 collars, which greatly eased the pressure on them.
	My cousin had been raised by his boss to $15. Next Saturday I was eagerly awaiting my raise but it failed to materialize. My cousin taunted me about how much better his boss was; besides, that three dollars made a tremendous difference between his new standard of living and mine-he could now afford to eat more. Finally, after another week went by, I mustered up enough fortitude to speak to the boss.
	"Mr. Kourash," I approached him with trepidation. "I would like to talk with you." I did not have the chance to continue because he cut right in.
	"I want to talk to you, too," he said. "I want to tell you how pleased I am with you. You're intelligent, you're ambitious, you're honest, you're dependable." It was quite a speech and it filled me with gratitude. I thought he liked me but now I knew.
	"Now," he paused dramatically, "I'll show you how great my confidence is in you. Here are the keys. I am entrusting you with them. From now on you'll open and close the shop." I was both elated and touched. I was advancing rapidly, indeed. Here I was, only five weeks in America and already entrusted with the keys to an entire shop. Mr. Kourash did not say anything about the raise and it would have been indelicate to mention that in that uplifting moment.
	What if I didn't get the raise! I had the keys. It meant getting up still earlier to have the shop open by 6:30, and leaving later in the evening, but it did not matter. I had the keys! One night

102
something went wrong again with the burglar alarm and I had to wait until ten before the Holmes people fixed it. When I mentioned that to Mr. Kourash the next day, he was most sympathetic and told me that next time that happened it was all right for me to nail up a few more collars while waiting.
	My cousin was far less impressed with the significance of the keys and I was wondering whether he wasn't right after all. I was determined to ask for a three-dollar raise the next Saturday. It was just and I had more than earned it. The more experience I gained the more work I had to do, and the harder I worked the hungrier I became. I was already in debt to my cousin for $1.20, all of which I had spent on additional food.
	The next Saturday I called the boss aside again. "Mr. Kourash, I would like to talk to you." I started where I had left off the previous Saturday.
	"I want to talk to you, too," again he interrupted with a majestic gesture. "I want to tell you how pleased I am with the progress you are making. To show how much I think of you, beginning this week I am going to pay you one dollar more."
	He was giving me a raise voluntarily without my even asking for it! He was really a good boss, a fine man to work for. True, I had intended to ask him for a three-dollar raise but I couldn't do that under these circumstances. A man is not a pig.
	Thirteen dollars a week still did not allow me to buy all the food I needed. I was always hungry. My cousin had been raised to $18 that week and the week after that to $20, all without his even asking for it. The season was on, the men in the shop were all working overtime and got paid for it, I didn't. My cousin asked me to go to work in his shop, he had talked with his foreman and he was eager to take me on. That Saturday I went to the boss and asked him for $18 a week. In truth I had planned to ask him for $20, but faltered at the last minute.
	Mr. Kourash was deeply wounded by my action. Here he was treating me like his own son, entrusting me with the keys, giv-

103
ing me all the opportunity to learn the trade. He had been accustomed to people taking advantage of his trusting confident nature, of his generosity. But never, never did he dream that I, of all people, would show such ingratitude. He became real angry, and gave me a terrific dressing down, accusing me of treachery, of cold-bloodedly stabbing him in the back.
	I felt wretched and miserable. Had I known he would take it so personally I would rather have cut my tongue out than bring up the subject. I tried to explain to him that all I wanted was a few dollars more and only because I was always hungry, that the hard work and the long hours, which I did not mind at all, gave me a much bigger appetite, which in turn put me deeper in debt to my cousin. But every time I wanted to interrupt him he waved me aside. By the time he finished it was too late for that explanation, I was too choked with emotion to talk. I took the keys, laid them silently on the table and went to put on my jacket to leave.
	"Where are you going?" asked Mr. Kourash, his voice again gentle and kind as it had always been with me.
	"Home," I answered miserably, "you don't want me here any more."
	Mr. Kourash was amazed. Of course he wanted me, hadn't he told me dozens of times how highly he thought of me, how much above the average, the common run of shopworkers I stood in his esteem? Not only that, he was going to raise me one dollar to fourteen dollars a week.
	But my jacket was already on; besides, I was too emotionally disturbed to listen. To prove how unjust he was in his accusation I told him that my cousin had been raised to $20 without ever having asked for it. Mr. Kourash's face turned crimson.
	"So that's what it is?" he roared. "It was he who put you up to this!" He knew my cousin, he would often come to the shop and wait for me to have lunch together. My cousin had a full lunch hour while I would get away only when I could. Now that

104
Mr. Kourash discovered what was back of it all he was no longer angry with me. He told me that he knew from the minute he laid eyes on my cousin that he was a born trouble-maker and predicted that he would come to no good end. He advised me to stay away from him in the future and to inform him that he was not to set foot again in his shop, ever. He realized I had been misled and offered me $15 a week.
	By then I was stubborn. I had not mentioned my cousin's pay for the purpose of bargaining but merely to refute his accusations. Now that Mr. Kourash had blamed my cousin, it was important to set the facts straight. "My cousin is getting twenty and I know the trade better, produce more work than he."
	Mr. Kourash picked up the keys, handed them to me and said in a soft, gentle, paternal voice, "You will be paid $18 beginfling next week." He was so kind about it I felt like embracing him. The raise was to start the next week and it would have been absolutely in bad taste to remind him of that extra dollar for this week he had first offered. That dollar would have bought me an extra hamburger and a double sweet roll at Max's Busy Bee every day that week, for which I greatly hungered, but-a man can't be a pig.
	It was a very good season for furs that year and the rush was on. The nailers got hopelessly behind and there was not an unemployed nailer to be found in the entire fur market. Mr. Kourash called me aside one day and asked where my cousin was, he hadn't seen him around for quite a while. When I reminded him that he had forbidden my cousin to set foot in his shop he waved that aside and asked me if I could influence him to quit his job and work for him. That way, since we were close friends, the two of us could be together all day. I told him that my cousin was by then making twenty-five dollars a week. Mr. Kourash said to offer him thirty. My cousin was willing but wanted thirty-five. Mr. Kourash was outraged over that impudence from a greenhorn yet he not only hired him, but also

105
agreed to pay him for overtime, on which my cousin insisted. The entire shop was working overtime until nine every night and my cousin was getting prosperous. He bought himself a new suit, a pair of shoes, three shirts with silk stripes, and even a sapphire tie-pin for thirty dollars.
	I was turning out more work than my cousin, I put in fourteen hours a day, and I was still getting only eighteen dollars a week, no overtime. In addition to that I had acquired other responsibilities. I had a system worked out and knew even better than Mr. Kourash where and how to straighten out bottlenecks, what orders had to be rushed out first, and so on. The men would rather turn to me than to Mr. Kourash if they needed anything, preferring to take their instructions from me. It was a gradual change-over and no one knew how it had come about but it definitely improved production. I took stock of the existing situation and then approached Mr. Kourash, boldly asking for an outright raise to thirty-five dollars plus overtime pay, like my cousin was getting.
	This time Mr. Kourash did not roar. He took me to his office, invited me to sit down and we had a long talk, a confidential one. He told me, in the strictest confidence, that all the workers in the shop would be laid off as soon as the season was over, all except me. He did not consider me on their level, a worker, but as his assistant, his right-hand man-I was to have a steady job with him as long as he lived. Furthermore, he was getting old. I was making excellent progress, eventually he would turn the entire shop over to me. He had been working hard long enough, he often wanted to take it easier but he had never been able to find anyone sufficiently trustworthy until I came along. It was a serious talk and it opened up a bright future for me. America was really proving to be the land of unlimited opportunity. He also raised me to twenty-five dollars right there and then. As a steady employee, who gets paid whether the shop works or not, xo6
of course I was not entitled to overtime pay-a fair and reasonable conclusion.
	My cousin and I had been getting along very well except for his occasional cynical attitude which I resented. He jeered again when, in strict confidence, I related my talk with Mr. Kourash to him. Having been less confined to the shop than I, he had broader contacts with other fur workers on the market. He said that all fur workers expected to be laid off after the season, that was why he wanted to make all the money he could to tide him over until next spring when the shops opened up again. He ridiculed me for overvaluing my position, he did not mind from whom he was taking orders, me, Mr. Kourash, or anybody, as long as he was paid for it. My cousin had also been a student in Hungary and I told him I was distressed to see how rapidly he had assumed the attitude of a common shopworker. He laughed and told me I would soon find out that a shop was not an officers' club and the word of a boss in America was not the bond of a gentleman. I saw no sense in arguing against such a prejudiced attitude and so I dropped the subject.
	Four weeks later the season was over and all the men in the shop were laid off, including my cousin. My approach to my job had paid dividends. When I pointed that out to my cousin, he merely shrugged his shoulders-he hoped for my sake that I would be proved right.
	The next week in the shop was like a dream. I nailed up the few remaining collars and then a small order came in. Since Mr. Kourash was no mechanic that left it all to me and I cut, sewed, nailed, and finished up that order brilliantly all by myself. I was really getting to be an all-around master furrier, the kind that was getting scarce in the trade.
	After that order had been filled I set about to clean the shop. I swept and mopped every corner, every inch of the floor, sorted all the patterns, took inventory of the stock, bundled up all loose
107
skins and hung them neatly on the racks. When everything was spick-and-span and a joy to behold, I called Mr. Kourash in and
proudly displayed the shop to him. Mr. Kourash examined everything minutely and was greatly pleased. He then pulled out sixteen dollars and told me he wouldn't be needing me any more, I should see him next spring, and to leave the keys on his desk. He wouldn't even let me finish out the week!
He even shortchanged me thirty-five cents!
108
1	Lri
.1.) 1!i THAT winter was tough. I had very little saved and couldn't keep up with my cousin's new high standard of living. He wouldn't eat in any more, he was taking all his meals in lunchrooms and delicatessen stores, sometimes even in a real restaurant; so we separated. I moved to a filthy bug-infested room just off Tenth Avenue, not quite a flophouse but the nearest thing to it. Even though I pulled my rusty iron bed into the center of the room and sprinkled insect powder all around the legs the bedbugs still outmaneuvered me. They crawled around the ceiling above the bed and then just plopped down.
	I did not find another job for months. By then I was actually down to starvation level, subsisting on one meager meal a day. I had developed an almost continuous cramp in my stomach and spent hours in front of restaurants just reading the menus. In fact, that was all the reading I did because in that state I couldn't concentrate on anything outside the "Help Wanted Male" ads. Always a voracious reader, I would now sit in the library for hours with a book open in front of me, without turning a page. I was so hungry my eyes would blur and my mind wander, developing delusions.
	I had only a few pennies left in my pocket, seventeen to be exact, the day I finally landed a job.
	That evening I asked the boss for a dollar loan until payday. The next night I did the same and every night thereafter until the end of the week. I had been hired at twenty-five dollars a week as a nailer. Nailers were then paid thirty-five to forty dollars and

109
I was a fast one, but I had asked for only twenty-live so as to get the job.
	On payday the boss handed me thirteen dollars. I looked at the money and then at the boss. I told him there was a mistake, after deducting the five dollars advanced I still had twenty dollars coming.
The boss said: "No."
"But you hired me for twenty-five a week!"
	The boss did not dispute that nor did he claim that my work was unsatisfactory.
"All I am paying is eighteen a week. Take it or leave it."
	Borrowing those dollars each day had told him about my desperate situation. He knew I had to take it.
	I was learning. I learned that there are variations and degrees in human exploitation. My first boss, Kourash, had exploited my zeal, my navet, my ambition; characteristics for which I was personally responsible. Kourash was a rascal; he outwitted me and I could take that without much rancor. But this boss had exploited my desperate need for food, my starving condition, for which I was not responsible, a situation beyond my control. That was inhumanly cruel. I felt like springing at his throat.
I learned that cruel exploitation germinates hate.
Murderous hate!
110
I	tl MOST fur shops were small, would run out of
	6 work often, and then the men would be laid off. The bigger
shops had more work and paid better, but most of them were
unionized. In the spring of 1923 I went to the Fur Workers'
Union to join up. To my amazement I was curtly informed the
union was not accepting any new members, that the union al-
ready had more members than there were jobs in union shops.
	An intuitive flash illuminated to me the flaw in the logic of that policy, and I was ignorant enough to call that helpfully to the attention of the business agent who had rejected my application. I began to explain to him that if they would let all of us nonunion workers join, there would be more union shops, in fact all shops would be union then.
	He wouldn't hear me out. "Are you going to tell me how to run this union?" he roared. "Gerrare here, you scab, before I break your neck!" He rose from his chair angrily, a big beefy man with a thick bull neck, his hands balled into a menacing fist.
	I did not tarry. Although logic was unquestionably on my side he had the more powerful argument. I was puzzled by the union's attitude. I couldn't see how leaders of a trade union organization could miss such an essential point in deductive reasoning. I was too ignorant to know that they were way ahead of me in a higher, more practical form of logic-that they were collecting money from the owners of the nonunion shops to leave their workers unorganized.

III
	I did manage to join that union though, less than a year later. Another fur worker with whom I became friendly "fixed it up" for me, and with that very same business agent, to boot. He took me downtown and told him I was a pal of his, an OK guy, not the kind of a bird who mixed into politics. The business agent was friendly, he even shook hands and promised to take me in, but it would cost me two hundred and fifty bucks "to fix it." That was steep, but I did not protest. I handed him fifty dollars, all I had, and promised him fifty more every other week. It was tough to squeeze that much out of my weekly pay of thirty-five dollars and I had to go back to taking my lunches at Max's Busy Bee. When I made my final payment the business agent took me to another office, had a girl make out my union card, then handed me a receipt.
I had made it-I was finally a union man.
The receipt was for ninety-nine dollars.
	Union shops paid better, and we were making more money even though we had to kick some of it back to the business agent; the shop chairman did the collecting.
	In some of the shops I met a few so-called "left wingers" who were fighting the existing union leadership, accusing them of corruption. One of them once persuaded me to attend a union meeting in Cooper Union which he claimed would call for a showdown vote with the "right wingers." The leader of the left wingers was Ben Gold, a slender, nice-looking young fellow.
	The moment I entered the hall, I sensed a great deal of tension. No sooner did the meeting open than a left winger rose to ask for the floor. A couple of men rushed up the aisles and grabbed him while his supporters jumped up on their seats, shouting and yelling in protest. The speaker, who by then was being dragged toward the exit, was digging his heels in, trying to resist, when my business agent rushed over, hauled off and punched him square in the face. That started a free-for-all on the floor. Others leaped up and started to swing at each other. But amazingly most
		of the members remained in their seats, watching the fight im-
	passively.
		I got excited. I was seated on the balcony and started to yell,
		"Don't hit him! Leave him alone!" when the two men next
		to me suddenly pulled me back to my seat, a third one reached
		over from the back and clapped his hand over my mouth, hard.
	They warned me to shut up or I'd get it, then demanded to see
		my union card and asked my name. By then I knew better. I
		gave them a false name, told them my shop chairman had taken
		my union card to have the dues stamp put into it, and gave them
		a wrong shop as my place of work. I also denied knowing any of
		the men who started the row, which was true, and gave as my
		reason for yelling that I had become excited. Since none of them
		had seen me before nor could anyone around me identify me,
	they let go my arms but watched me suspiciously throughout the
		meeting. After the left wingers were cleared out one union offi-
		cial made a long speech in English, followed by another official
	who spoke in Yiddish, but I didn't catch anything of what was
	being said. That closed the meeting. No vote had been taken.
			I attended only one more union meeting after that. By that
		time the left wingers with Ben Gold were in control of the union
	and they made attendance at that meeting compulsory under
		threat of a fine. As it turned out, that meeting was in honor of
		Benjamin Gitlow, the leader of the Communist Party I was told,
		who had just been released from jail. I was surprised at that in-
		formation. I had not known we had Communists in America;
		I thought Communism was confined to Europe and China alone.
		Gitlow was greeted by thunderous applause. He made quite a
	long speech but I was not attuned to politics and it made no im-
		pression on me.
		Shortly after that meeting I obtained a job as a foreman and
		since foremen did not have to belong to the union, I quit-I was
		fed up with being bossed around and was glad to wash my hands
		of that gang.
112		113
I / i I DIDN'T do much "roaring" in the early twenties. Those years were spent in groping after knowledge, perfecting my English, taking courses in theater, aspiring to become a playwright.
	In those years, my life in America was the isolated existence of the uprooted immigrants who had lost their old environment and were unable to find the right new relationships to substitute for it.
	Working during the day, reading, studying, writing by night, gave me no opportunity to meet people with whom I could exchange ideas and discuss the rich manifestations of life around me. I felt very lonely, as if separated by an invisible wall from the teeming population around me. Those were also womanless days. I recall those aching Saturday and Sunday evenings when, having spent my day writing at my desk, I would walk the deserted dark streets downtown desperately longing for companionship, welcoming even the query of an occasional lost passer-by seeking direction. Sometimes entire week ends would pass without my having uttered a single sentence, eating my meals in the Automat, picking up newspapers and cigarettes at the corner stand, tendering my money and receiving my change without a word exchanged. Those bleak anchorite week ends are still etched in my memory. The following Mondays in the shop my vocal cords would feel strangely constricted when forcing out the first words.
Innocent as I was about politics I nevertheless began to observe

114
some ugly cracks in the faade of democracy. The corruption of the Harding administration, the lynchings and floggings by the Ku Klux Klan in the South, the execution of Sacco and Vanzetti, two harmless Italian anarchists clumsily framed for murder, made me realize that everything was not milk and honey in God's own country, either.
	As my skill in the trade increased, so did my earning power. By 1927 I was a foreman and making good money. I moved out of my furnished room and rented a four-room railroad flat in an old brownstone house in Greenwich Village, back of Loew's Sheridan Theater. I furnished it comfortably in a Japanese motif -which was the cheapest-with mats, lanterns, Japanese prints, and a huge Japanese paper umbrella hanging from the ceiling for atmosphere; and with two wide beds, for hospitality. Company was no longer a problem, particularly as the news spread in the neighborhood that that well-heeled Hunkie usually had a supply of bootleg liquor on hand. No more lonely Saturday and Sunday nights for me; week ends I always had some kind of a party going on. Gin was seventy-five cents a bottle delivered, five bottles for three dollars. Usually I bought the five bottles where three would more than do, and woke up with a bigger hangover for a dividend.
	I met people, a multitude of people, the type of people I had longed to meet-writers, artists, poets, philosophers. I even met the kind I had not wanted to meet.
	Life became gay, with company ever present and I enjoyed it to the full, until one night I suddenly looked around and inspected everyone in that crowded apartment. Every nook and corner was filled, people were even perched on the radiators, window sills, on top of the piano, or just sprawling on the floor.
	That sight was sobering. Not a single one of those present did any actual creative work to my knowledge. The writers did not write, the artists did not paint, the poets would redeclaim the same few lines they had composed ages ago. I couldn't recall a

115
single instance where I had succeeded in holding a worthwhile discussion with any of them on any serious literary or artistic subject. They were forever talking about their need to express themselves, yet never did a thing about it. Only the girls who were flocking to the Village from all parts of the country managed to approach that goal. Once they discovered what their best medium of expression was-usually a couch-they expressed themselves well, and often.
	In all that crowd I was the only one who actually did write, who turned out a play a year. Yet these people were acting patronizingly toward me because I was holding down a job at the same time. They considered me bourgeois! It was a revealing moment. I took my remaining two bottles of gin, poured them into the sink, and declared the party over. That caused quite a fight until the police came and took a wagonload of my guests away. The place was left in shambles and I emerged considerably bruised in flesh but free in spirit. I moved to Lexington Avenue, thus ending that Bohemian phase of my life.
	However, life in Greenwich Village did have one positive aspect-it speeded up the process of my Americanization. It had brought me into intimate contact with native Americans from all parts of the country who, outside of an occasional crack at my thick Hungarian accent, never made me feel inferior because of my foreign birth. By accepting me as an equal they helped me to become an American myself, proud of my country, cherishing our traditions.
	The "land where my fathers died" has ever since been America to me.
i
IC) tn
1 tni By the middle of 1928 I finished my third play. Shubert had taken a five-year option on my first one: with two other plays now going the rounds, a Broadway production did not seem too far off.
	Next I turned experimentally to the short story and wrote two. Vanity Fair bought them both and invited me to submit more.
	I was awed when I saw my name appear in Vanity Fair along with such famous writers as Aldous Huxley, Sherwood Anderson, D. H. Lawrence, Ferenc Molnr, and even G. K. Chesterton, not to mention Alexander Woollcott and Deems Taylor. Shopworker or not, I was sure beginning to travel in illustrious company.
	There was but one fly in the ointment. I was disappointed in my writing. As a great admirer of Bernard Shaw and Galsworthy, I wanted to write about social problems instead of turning out amusing froth. Now I decided to chance it even though I felt I was treading on unsure ground.
	For plot in my new play I drew on my experiences in the Hungarian Revolution. The hero was to be a naive young man suddenly confronted with the problem of whether to uphold law and order which meant protecting the corrupt township officials, or to side with the victims which meant giving in to mob rule.
	The play was shaping up well, the characters were coming through sharp and clear, the situation showed rich dramatic promise, when suddenly my foundation began to totter. In trying to delineate the conflicting views of the opposing characters,

117
questions arose in my mind that led to other questions, more and more fundamental ones, such as:
What was law and what was order?
Since those town officials were undeniably guilty of misusing their governmental powers and of cheating those defenseless war widows and orphans out of their allotments, was it still morally justifiable to shield them from mob justice? Is mob justice really justice or vengeance?
Where does justice end and vengeance begin?
In any case was it justice, was it morally justifiable to strip those wretched, freezing peasants of their looted army blankets and clothes when, after all, those were government property?
To whom does government property belong?
Was the Krolyi revolutionary government a legitimate government?
When it comes right down to it, what makes a government legitimate?
	Those questions kept breeding like rabbits until I found myself way beyond my depth. I tried to read up on the subject but each source seemed to contradict the others. I felt stymied and when a girl invited me to go with her to visit Norman Thomas, head of the American Socialist Party, I jumped at the chance.
	Norman Thomas lived near the Village. His paneled and book-filled study reminded me of a sacristy. I didn't know then that he had actually been a minister. He was tall, handsome, gracious, and cultured, but I found myself tongue-tied and although he invited us to visit him again, I never did. He didn't fit in my play.
	That mob leader who challenged the hero in my play was a wild peasant agitator with blood in his eye and Norman Thomas just didn't fit that part. I couldn't imagine him using the words a rabble-rouser was supposed to say.

118
	I fretted and fussed, putting my own speeches into the mouth of that mob leader, but they sounded unconvincing. How the hell did I know what those damned peasants really thought or wanted besides looting and stringing up those town officials? Then I recalled the U) Elore, a Hungarian daily published in New York. I had read a few copies of it when I was a new immigrant but it was too radical to interest me. I went out and bought a copy. It was even more radical now; it had gone completely Communist. Those people ought to know all about it if I could only gain entry to them. Then I bethought myself of Emery Balint, a Hungarian writer whose novel I was once asked to translate into English. I knew he was part of that U) Elore crowd, he ought to be able to help me.
	I called Balint, outlined my problem, told him I would like him to help me meet some Hungarian radicals so I could acquaint myself with their lingo. Balint was most co-operative and said he would do even better-he would arrange for me to meet some of the men who actually took part in the Hungarian Revolution. As a start he invited me to a public meeting of the Anti-Horthy League scheduled for the following week.
	I thanked Balint for his assistance. This was indeed a lucky break. I considered radicals and Communists secretive, clannish people and had never expected that a simple telephone call would get me near them.
	That telephone call proved even more potent, could I have divined it. It started me on a journey that made a professional revolutionary out of me and led inevitably to Spain.
119
1cI
7 ii As I entered the meeting hail of the Anti-Horthy League in the Hungarian section of Yorkvile I was rather disappointed in the size of the audience. In my inexperience I had expected to find at least a few hundred people at a meeting supposedly "public" but I counted only fourteen including the three men on the platform, one of whom was Balint. The meeting was already in progress. Balint was speaking but no one seemed to be paying him any attention, the audience was engaged in private conversations of their own. As I made my way to a seat in the rear all eyes regarded me with curiosity and what seemed to me suspicion. I must have been the only "new face" there.
	Hugo Gellert, a prominent Hungarian artist widely known for his drawings in the Sunday World magazine section, was presiding. He had received considerable publicity a little while back when he was fired by the World for refusing to tone down his illustrations for a series of articles dealing with the brutal excesses of Mussolini's Fascist government in Italy. As Gellert related it to me later, the publishers had called him in and told him:
	"When we hired you we thought that we were hiring an artist. We find we have hired a radical."
Hugo Gellert's answer was equally to the point:
	"When you hired me you thought you were hiring a prostitute. You find you have hired a man."
	I do not now recall whether it was Gellert or Balint who gave the main address. The speaker talked about the necessity of fight-

120
ing the Horthy terror which, translated by him, meant building the League. Later I was to learn that formula well. In left-wing circles to fight for or against any cause is always equated with building the organization.
	The discussion was mostly about the long-overdue issue of the Anti-Horthy League magazine. The League had difficulty in raising the required funds and in consequence the monthly had not been coming out monthly at all.
	Before the close of the meeting Balint called on me publicly to join the League. This unexpected invitation took me unawares. I replied I had not given it any thought as yet, besides as I understood from that meeting, the Anti-Horthy League was an affiliation of Hungarian societies and not an organization of individual members.
	Balint said that was right but I could join the League as an unofficial representative of the Furriers Union. I replied that I had withdrawn from that union, foremen did not have to belong.
	Balint still persisted, wanting to know what other organizations I belonged to. At first I thought of the Green Room Club. I had joined that once when it looked as if my first play was about to go into production but resigned shortly afterward, finding it a waste of time. I really wasn't a joiner. Finally I remembered Murphy's Democratic Assembly Club. I had not quit that, I simply never went back again. Perhaps that might do.
	"The only organization I belong to is the Democratic Assembly Club," I informed him.
	There was a loud gasp. It came from a girl whom I later came to know as Blond Elsie. She was a natural "gasper" which made her presence a valuable addition to all protest meetings. She was a person easily astounded, horrified, made indignant, or filled with sorrow; a veritable human organ who responded instantly to all such calls to emotion with a solitary but powerful gasp. She had a deep bass voice due to a prenatal obstruction in

121
her throat which enabled her to project her gasp to the very last row in the audience-a great political asset in the radical movement.
	Balint looked at me incredulously. Could I have been betraying him?
	"The Democratic Party, did you say?" he reproached me, sounding shocked.
	I was aware I had started something although I wasn't sure what. I explained how I had gone and enrolled immediately after having received my citizenship papers. That was the first time since the start of the meeting that all conversation on the floor had ceased. They listened to the explanation of my motives in attentive silence as if in court.
	When I finished Balint looked relieved. He and Gellert went into a hurried consultation with a third person referred to as "Comrade Kovess" who had been sitting alongside of them at the presiding table. (I was introduced to him after the meeting, his full name was Louis Kovess and Balint whispered impressively that he was the "Secretary of the Hungarian Bureau," making it sound important.)
	After their consultation Balint announced officially that everything was in order, they would expunge from the minutes that I was a member of the Democratic Assembly Club and the bylaws of the League were hereby amended to allow for individual membership. It was a simple solution. Rules are made by men and can be unmade by them.
	I was in and was immediately appointed to the Press and Publicity Committee and also to the Executive Board of the League.
	They certainly recognized talent when they saw it. I felt rather flattered.
122
hIP i AFTER the meeting Balint, Gellert, Kovess, and I repaired to the Hungarian Workers Club Restaurant in Yorkvile and we talked.
There really wasn't any League, except on paper.
	The Anti-Horthy League was a disguised attempt by the Hungarian Communist Bureau to extend its influence over the non-Communist Hungarian masses by uniting all Hungarian societies hostile to Horthy into one League secretly controlled by them. The League got off to a promising start when a number of non-Communist organizations responded to the alluring call for unity, only to withdraw hastily when Communist control became evident to them. In consequence, by the time I was elected a member of the Executive Board the League was only an empty shell desperately trying to prolong its existence, although I was not aware of this at the time.
	Hugo Gellert, the president, was not a Communist Party member. He was a sincere liberal who hated all Fascists and who was convinced that the Anti-Horthy League could be of great service in curbing the Horthy terror in Hungary.
	Balint, the executive official of the League, was a Communist in ideology but not officially a member of the Communist Party, either. I was convinced that he was, because he always referred to himself proudly as a Communist. Only later, when I myself became a member of the Party, did I discover that Balint had never joined. He was too much of an individualist to submit to the authority and discipline of the Communist Party.
123
	Balint, then in his mid-thirties, was a brilliant person, a near genius albeit an erratic one. By profession he was a fresco painter specializing in restoring murals in churches. He was also a musician and composer of sorts, and a powerful writer with the emotional impact of a high-velocity shell. He wrote in Hungarian, Hungarian novels revolutionary in content which made the publication of his books in Horthy Hungary an impossibility.
	The third person in the restaurant with us that evening, Louis Kovess, was a shabbily dressed man of thirty-one, of medium height, with a noble forehead and sunken cheeks. He was extremely tense and his eyes glowed with the feverish shine of the tubercular, which he was.
	Kovess had been one of the leaders of the Young Communists in Hungary during the Bela Kun dictatorship; it was said he had been arrested by the Horthy police but managed to escape from jail. As the Secretary of the Hungarian Bureau he exercised top leadership over all Hungarian Communists in the United States and Canada.
	From that evening on I became one of the most active members in the Anti-Horthy League. Since Hugo was usually too busy with his art, this raised the number of active members in the League to two, Balint and myself. Our own activity was not overtaxing, either. It consisted mainly in the two of us getting together from time to time in my apartment, having a few drinks which Balint called "getting a perspective," and then hatching schemes. The more "perspective" we poured into ourselves the bolder the concepts became and the more feasible they appeared.
	As an outcome of those "executive meetings" every once in a while we would "issue a statement," sometimes a MANIFESTO, occasionally even a PROCLAMATION in the name of the Anti-Horthy League which we claimed represented the "might of all the hundreds of organizations united against Horthy," which would then be prominently featured in the Uj Elore. In

124
those pronouncements we would invoke dire threats against Horthy and his government, indict them under all counts ranging from castrations to murder and then brand them with our verdict "in the name of the people of Hungary" and, for good measure, in the name of "all mankind and eternal history."
	At first I would question how the two of us could take on the responsibility for such sweeping statements. Balint would lecture me, explaining how the two of us, "in the larger historical sense," actually were "the true expression of the muted voices of the millions of Hungarians writhing in oppression." Besides, it was not the two of us, actually, who did the speaking; we were merely articulating "the mighty voice of the powerful AntiHorthy League which made Horthy tremble"!
	Whether we made Horthy actually tremble or not I had no means to ascertain, but we did have one yardstick by which to gauge the effect of our pontifications. When we really hit home we would be vehemently denounced by those American Hungarian newspapers which were subsidized by the Horthy government. Occasionally voices of warning would be raised against us from the various Hungarian pulpits also, thus providing a much wider dissemination of our pronouncements, even if in a negative way. We chalked up all such responses as gains and promptly issued even bolder "manifestoes."
	Shortly after I had embarked on this activity our "pipeline" to the Hungarian Consulate in New York (in reality the wife of an artist whom Balint knew and who worked there as a translator) warned us that my name had been put on the Index, charging me with high treason against the Hungarian government, making me subject to immediate arrest and possible execution if I ever set foot in Hungary. It was a disturbing sensation to be so proscribed but I shrugged it off. I was an American. I had no desire whatever to return to my native land. All I was interested in was helping those poor Hungarian masses oppressed by Horthy regain their freedom. Having reasoned that out I

125
became proud of having been placed on the Index. I had long known of Horthy, let him now know of my existence! My being put on the Index seemed to have personalized our relationship and added new zest to my activities. It is far more satisfying to stir up trouble against a dictator for whom one entertains a personal grudge.
	One day Balint called me excitedly. Matthias Rakosi (sixteen years later the Communist boss of Hungary) who had been arrested in Hungary and faced a sentence of death, had gone on a hunger strike in jail. Kovess ordered that the League must take the lead to help Rakosi. We were to have an "emergency mass meeting" that night.
	Only four people showed up at that emergency mass meeting: Kovess, Balint, Hugo Gellert, and myself. Kovess informed us that Rakosi had been on his hunger strike nearly a week, that protest demonstrations had been planned in Rakosi's behalf in front of the Hungarian Embassies in France and Austria, and that our League must organize a similar demonstration in Washington.
	I couldn't see the point. Rakosi was a Communist, while the Anti-Horthy League was a nonpartisan, non-Communist organization. We had nothing to do with the Communists. Let the Communists demonstrate in Washington if they so desired.
	Hugo and Balint kept silent. Kovess was most patient with me. The League was anti-Horthy, wasn't it? Of course it was. Rakosi was certainly anti-Horthy, wasn't he? I couldn't dispute that either. Well, didn't that make for a common cause? Besides, neither Horthy nor world opinion would pay any attention to whatever the Communists did. The "whole world" knew that the Anti-Horthy League was a non-Communist organization. I was a non-Communist, a published author. Hugo was a nonCommunist, a well-known artist. A demonstration by the League led by the two of us would carry far more weight with the public than any Communist demonstration could. If the two of us were

126
arrested and we then told our story at the trial, that would be news and it would reach American public opinion. His exposition was logical, it definitely made sense, yet the idea of my taking part in a demonstration was repugnant to me. At that time demonstrations were still rare occurrences in the United States and the participants were generally considered to be, even by me, disreputable characters, definitely outside the pale.
	The possibility of being arrested appealed to me even less. I was a law-abiding citizen. Arrest to me meant dishonor, disrepute, the antithesis of everything I strove for. In short, I was afraid, very much afraid of the consequences and attempted to hide my fear by raising various objections. The Anti-Horthy League had only three active members. How could the three of us stage a demonstration, and in Washington at that?
	I was an innocent. Kovess had anticipated all my excuses and had everything planned. The Hungarian Bureau would send twenty Hungarian Communist Party members along with us from New York. They would be reinforced by thirty other Hungarian party members from Baltimore and from other near-by points in Maryland. In addition, the American Communist Party had also agreed to co-operate and promised to send us another sixty to seventy of their members. All in all we would have more than ioo people participating.
	I had nothing more to say. Kovess had confronted me with logic, facts, and figures, a combination I had never been able to resist. A demonstration it was to be, with myself as one of the two leaders. I wanted very much to back out but I couldn't see any honorable way to effect it.
	The next night we left for Washington. Only five of the twenty New York Hungarian Communists promised by Kovess showed up. We had about twenty placards with us, one intended for every five demonstrators. We traveled by coach and I tried to sleep but couldn't. I, who from childhood on had intermittently been plagued by two fears, that of going blind or of being

127
confined in an isolated jail cell, was now deliberately traveling on a train to put myself in jail. Why? How come?
	I reviewed the salient points in my life. I wanted to be a writer of good plays. I wanted to know life and understand t. I dreamed about fame although not too often. I hoped to be rich but not seriously. What I wanted fundamentally was to be doing the things of which I felt myself capable. I wanted to see injustice done away with, a happy life for everyone. If I could personally help the Hungarian people regain their freedom my life would have a fuller meaning. I recalled with irony my previous trip to Washington, the first and only time I had been there. That had occurred about a year and a half before, when I was spending my vacation as a guest of a distinguished Southern family in Virginia, invited by a lady interested in getting a part in one of my plays. We had been driven to Washington by a uniformed chauffeur in a luxurious Locomobile limousine and my hosts had introduced me to their senators and congressman who greeted me with gracious charm, and who even went so far as to have the recently completed Pan-American Building opened for us when I expressed disappointment that it was closed that day.
	Now I was on my way to Washington again, not in sunshine but in cold drizzling rain, not as a promising playwright but as a bum to be arrested. As I contemplated the strong possibility of going to jail I discovered that my former feeling of apprehension was gone, that it had been replaced by a growing sense of exultation. I was being called, I was being chosen. It was a spiritual glow I had never experienced before. It was as if I were floating way up high in the clear sky, supremely confident of the purity of my mission and in perfect communion with the spirit of all mankind. I believe it was a truly religious experience. I saw myself a symbolic knight riding a spirited charger to avenge injustice-and floated off to sleep.
We arrived in Washington shortly after six in the morning,

128
bleary-eyed and weary. We cleaned ourselves up in the washroom, smoothed our crumpled collars, straightened our ties, called up the newspapers, and then took the streetcar to the Hungarian Embassy. We saw two women waiting there and soon discovered that those two sleepy-eyed, middle-aged housewives were the sum total of all the revolutionary forces that the American Communist Party and the Hungarian Bureau were jointly able to mobilize from all of Washington, Baltimore, and the State of Maryland. Discouraging as that was, Gellert and I adjusted ourselves to the existing situation.
	There we were, nine of us, clustered around the Embassy and not another soul in sight. The gate to the building was shut, the windows closed and dark, the Embassy appeared abandoned.
	I was neither nervous nor afraid any more. It was cold and drizzling. I was carrying about a half dozen roiled up placards under my arms bearing slogans such as "DOWN WITH THE MURDEROUS HORTHY GOVERNMENT," "HUNGARY NEEDS BREAD AND FREEDOM-NOT GALLOWS," "Fax MATrHIAS RAK05I," and so on. There had been one stating "HANDS OFF HAITI," but I couldn't see what Horthy or Rakosi had to do with Haiti and I had left that one in the train.
	About an hour passed and the group was getting impatient. We were a sorry, rain-soaked lot, looking more like shivering pedestrians waiting for a streetcar than a determined band of avengers ready to shake to their foundations the pillars of the Horthy government.
	We were anxious to get started but Hugo wanted to wait until the newspapermen showed up.
	After a while our group attracted the attention of a passing policeman. He continued his walk to the corner and then stopped, watching us from a distance. It was getting close to nine o'clock in the morning and there was some traffic on the street now. Hugo and I agreed we might as well start.
I lined up the people in single file, spaced six feet apart to

129
make the line look longer, rolled one of my placards down in front of me, and told the others to do the same. With each of us displaying a poster the line seemed transformed; stretched out to nearly sixty feet it looked definitely impressive. Hugo and I took position in the lead and then we started marching. I glanced in the direction of the policeman on the corner to see how he reacted in order to formulate my plans accordingly. He was hurrying away.
	It was a most awkward line. We were nervous and couldn't keep six feet apart, we would unconsciously bunch up to avoid the sense of isolation around that deserted building.
	The few passers-by gave us a quick glance, then hurried away -that was all the notice we attracted. I brought the column to a halt, there seemed to be no sense to it that way. We went into a huddle and decided to shout so as to provoke some reaction from inside the Embassy. Each of us began to yell but the sound seemed to die, absorbed by that big stone building and by the broad empty street.
	We changed to shouting in unison, chanting: "Free Rakosi I" "Down with the Horthy government!" That sounded better. A few passers-by stopped. We were drawing a crowd, although not a big one. They watched us from the curb, not too curious, merely to see what might develop, with that half-interested stare accorded to freaks outside the tent of a side show, all right for free, but not worth the price of admission.
	A porter from inside the Embassy now came up to the gate and watched us impassively. We continued marching and chanting in a desultory fashion. It was getting to be a bore, also ridiculous. We were all dejected. My throat was getting hoarse, my arms were tired from holding my poster and carrying that additional bundle of placards under my arm. It was an unnatural position. I had to keep my arms glued to my side, I couldn't raise my elbows or the roll would have fallen.
130
		Suddenly the crowd, which had been slowly increasing, showed
		a quick sign of excitement. All faces turned to the corner. Six
	policemen with a sergeant in the lead were coming down the
		street. Our line tensed. The policemen carried big revolvers in
		open holsters, held their night clubs gripped in their hands with
		the black straps hanging from their wrists. They were big beefy
		men. They were not marching, just walking, heading straight
		toward us. It was a menacing sight, doom about to descend.
		The police were now only a few steps away and relentlessly
	closing in. I stiffened and shouted:
			"Free Rakosi! Down with the Horthy government!" The
	sound did not come out as loud as I intended. A few of the
		demonstrators responded, but not above a mumble.
		The sergeant came right up to me, tightening his grip on his
	night stick. I drew a deep breath and straightened up. We were
		face to face, his eyes boring into mine. My neck turned rigid
		in anticipation of the blow.
			"What are you doing here, boys?" His voice was gruff but
		not hostile, he was on official business and he wanted to know.
		The tenseness in my neck eased but my muscles were still
		coiled.
			"Demonstrating against Horthy," I replied. He seemed to con-
		template that for a second, so I followed it up with further
	explanation. He listened for a few moments then cut in.
			"All right, you've demonstrated enough. Now hand me those
		posters and go home." While he spoke the other policemen
		went around and confiscated the placards. There was no rough
		stuff. They simply reached for the posters and took them. They
		met no opposition. I sensed that psychologically there couldn't
		be any resistance, yet that was still wrong.
			The sergeant reached for my poster and took it from my hands.
		Then he pointed to the rolled-up bundle under my arm.
			"How about those?" he said.
	131
Somebody had to offer resistance.
	"I am going to keep them!" I defied him and tightened my hug on the roll.
	"O.K., keep them," he shrugged. "Now get going, break it up." By then his men were efficiently separating the demonstrators from each other. The sergeant next turned to the crowd, which was sizeable by now.
	"O.K., break it up-get going. It's all over-keep going, keep going." The crowd obediently dissolved into individuals, each proceeding on his own way. Our people were moving singly toward the corner. Hugo and I remained standing where we were. The policemen barely glanced at us. Just then a taxi pulled up spilling three newsmen and we saw another one sauntering up the street. They talked with the sergeant and then came up to Hugo and me, wanting to know what was up. We gave them the information but they did not appear much interested, took only a few notes. The sergeant then told them and us that that was enough, and we all left, the newspapermen going in one direction, we to the corner where our people were waiting. We instructed them to meet us at the railroad station.
	On the train back to New York the demonstrators were elated, recalling to each other in detail just what each of them did and said, what a successful demonstration that had been.
	I felt weary and grossly deflated. I was no longer the shining knight and appeared ridiculous even in my own eyes. The entire performance was silly and senseless, the demonstration had accomplished nothing.
	That judgment proved wrong. The demonstration made the Washington papers. The news had also been transmitted by the wire services; some of the New York papers picked it up. Abroad, that news item was prominently displayed in the Communist and Socialist press and even in some liberal papers; it made the front page of Praz'da and other Soviet papers. The greatest significance of the story was that the demonstration had taken place 132
in Washington, citadel of the greatest capitalist nation in the world. That story gave spurt to other demonstrations in other parts of the globe, including Latin and South America. Because of that world-wide spotlight, Admiral Horthy did not dare to have Rakosi executed; he commuted his sentence to twenty years' imprisonment.
	My judgment had been based on what had actually happened, on our sorry showing in Washington. I had failed to comprehend how well Kovess understood the art of propaganda.
Our demonstration had indeed saved Rakosi's life.
	When Rakosi was installed in power by the Soviet Red Army in Hungary some sixteen years later the Socialists and Liberals everywhere were too disunited to organize demonstrations to save the lives of the untold numbers of Liberal and Socialist Hungarians Rakosi had sentenced to the gallows. Not that it would have mattered. Rakosi, as a Communist, understood full well the power of aroused public opinion-he owed his life to it. When he came into power he saw to it, through terror and censorship, that public opinion reflected but one point of view.
His!
'33
