E
I: OIOC
many other nationalities faced the prospect of withdrawal from Spain with grave concern.
The Americans had nothing to fear from returning to their
homeland. The only charge that could be raised against them
was violation of a passport regulation, at worst a minor offense, and the wide anti-Fascist, pro—Loyalist sentiment in the USA. made prosecution for it extremely doubtful.
However, the Germans, Italians, Yugoslavs, Hungarians, Greeks, Bulgarians, Austrians, Poles, etc.——-many of them with a blood price on their heads—could not possibly return to their
own Fascist or semi-Fascist countries without facing long—term
imprisonment, torture, and even death. Many of those exiles had had hopes of settling in Spain after the war, of finding a haven
there after existing for years like hunted animals, hiding out with forged passports only one step ahead of the police, im—
prisoned for false entry time after time, and shunted from one unwelcoming country to another. Men without a country, the crippled among them even dreamed of a modest government
pension, of living out their lives in their newly adopted country as honored citizens.
These dreams were now shattered. By the terms of Negrin’s un- conditional withdrawal no volunteer was permitted to remain on Spanish soil even if he wished to stay and become a Spanish citizen. That left these volunteers with but one country to go
442
E
56 E WHILE the Americans rejoiced, the volunteers of

if
to—the Soviet Union. I considered that a cheerful alternative, this was the preferred choice of most of them anyway.
"They have fought the Fascists, the foes of mankind; now
they will have a chance to help build Socialism in the only socialist country in the world—the fulfillment of the Communist
dream! History is working out well for them, the only reward
worthy of aspiration." I wrote a warm farewell to them in an editorial for the Volunteer for Liberty, congratulating these
Internationals on their good luck in going to the Soviet Union.
My first intimation that there was something wrong with that concept came when I was unexpectedly summoned by Marty.
Waving the proofs of that editorial with its Spanish translation in my face he began to scream: Who gave me the right to
formulate policy for the Soviet Union? He tore those proofs to bits and ordered me out of his sight, raving that although he knew all Americans were arrogant and stupid, yet he hadn’t
expected to encounter such colossal political idiocy in a leading comrade.
I left in a daze. I did not have the faintest idea what was
wrong. Basically that editorial was nothing more than a friendly, run of the mill expression of solidarity with the Soviet Union and the international working class, such as any Communist edi- tor would write year in and out, by the ream.
The next day I found a note on my desk addressed to all editors announcing the new official line we were to follow, i.e., the volunteers who were the finest and most experienced anti- Fascist comrades in the world were badly needed in the demo— cratic countries to lead the fight there against Fascism; hence that is where all of them must go.
I must indeed have been a political idiot as Marty had charged because I didn’t catch on even then. In fact, I approved of that new line and thought it logical until a German colleague en- lightened me. He was witheringly sarcastic, deriding me as a
443

self-righteous, insensitive, smug American and finally turned on me furiously.
"Don’t you see what this line actually means?"
I didn’t, even though I tried hard. That line sounded solid to
me.
"It means the Soviet Union has shut her doors in our face,
you fool!" he almost hissed in hate. His long—practiced party- leader mask was gone, his face was writhing with emotion.
"We have no place to go, can’t yet understand that! Which
country would permit us, seven-probe Communists, to enter her gates? Would you expect the capitalists to invite us in and say, "please cut our throats and ring the death knell of capitalism over our tomb!’ We are the battle-tested, battle—scarred Com- munists who have fought to the death at the call of the Com— intern, and now the Soviet Union is refusing us asylum. We’re doomed, doomed by the Soviet Union, we may even end up by being handed over to Hitlerl"
He turned away from me, his face buried in his hands.
Up until then I knew him only as one of those close-mouthed, secretive Germans who rebuff all attempts at friendship and
intimacy, careful not to show any emotion. Now that hard- bitten revolutionary actually sobbed. The enormity of that
revelation affected me greatly. I found there was nothing I could do or say; I tiptoed out of his office. I did not know then how
prophetic his words were—that many of them would indeed be handed over to Hitler by Stalin after the Nazi-Soviet Pact
in 1939 to celebrate that love feast. . . .
When we crossed into France the men went wild over the
sight of real milk and white bread with which we were greeted at the French railroad station. At Le Havre we were held up
nearly a week because of a strike by the French seamen. Al—
though we were confined to the grounds I managed to slip out and mingle with the population.
When we finally sailed from France we made strange pas— 444

wagers. Even though we had been deloused, most of us out of sheer habit were still scratching our armpits, rectums, and
genitals in full View of the other passengers who, alarmed, un- derstandably would have no traffic with us. Few if any of the
volunteers were aware of this rebuff. They, too, preferred to keep their distance, contemptuous as they were of those "lousy capi- talists."
445

n
57
1938. The customs did not delay us long, most of us had nothing of value to declare. My possessions consisted of my notebooks,
some historical documents and photographs I had managed to retain for souvenirs, a few handkerchiefs, two pairs of spare
socks, an extra shirt and one extra set of underwear, all packed in a cheap paper suitcase. The customs inspector gave it one dis—
gusted look, poked a wary index finger into the contents, nodded to me to close the top, scribbled a hasty cross on it and I was
through, back in America, alive. Of the approximately 4800 American volunteers about 3500 had served with the combat
troops, according to my reconstruction. Nearly three out of every four of the latter had been killed Eghting Fascism in Spain. I
doubt the accurate hgures will ever be ascertained for no full record was kept either here or in Spain.
After we were through the customs the party organized us into a parade. I marched for about a block and then pulled out
only to find myself surrounded by a number of admiring com- rades; some I recognized, the rest seemed only vaguely familiar. I was a hero!
We walked cast on Fiftieth Street and I paused three times to buy frankfurters. I are five of them and was on my sixth when we entered a cafeteria. I had a couple of hot roast beef sandwiches there and drank glass after glass of beer. On my way out I saw a penny scale and stepped on it. Beer, hot dogs,
«6
IE
WE landed in New York some time in December,

sandwiches and all, I was still a skinny bastard; weighed only
137 pounds.
My proud friends escorted me in triumph to the ofiice of
the Friends of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade which was over- crowded with waiting friends and relatives. The air was festive and jubilant. Tacked on the wall were all kinds of mimeographed invitations to receptions by the various party branches in honor of "these brave sons of the toilers, the conquering heroes of the
revolutionary working class who slew the ugly beast of Fascism. Donation Fifty Cents."
When my turn came to register, the girl comrade took my
name, address, the party unit to which I belonged, which was Ohio. I had no New York address. When she heard that she
offered me a room way out in Brooklyn belonging to a comrade who was temporarily out of town. I could use that for a couple of days until I found a place of my own. She then informed me the Friends of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade were desperately short of funds, I would understand that with all the expenses
they were having, but she could let me have a couple of dollars if I needed assistance desperately, five dollars, she eyed me
speculatively, ten dollars! That was absolutely the limit, but the party would get me on relief before I spent that ten if I was
careful with it. I told her I didn’t want any money, which made her happy.
She asked me to wait, she would see if there were any mes.
sages for me, she came back with three, her voice and entire attitude changed. She was a hairy witch with warts all over
her face. She didn’t know I was the Comrade Voros, she used to read my articles in the Daily Worker and she loved them, she smiled at me coquettishly, handing me the slips. One was
from the editor of the Daily Worker, the other two from the Central Committee, all of them requesting me to report there at once.
447

i". W315 '\
The girl comrade asked me to give back the key, she had -1118i recalled that a comrade had offered her apartment Which Was much closer, it was in Manhattan just outside the Village_ I could have it for two whole weeks, it was a very modern apart-
ment beautifully furnished, she had been there once to a most wonderful party. She also asked me was I sure I didn’t need any
money, she could let me have twenty dollars for the time being. I accepted the apartment but again refused the cash, the very
thought of accepting money collected by the party for Spanish aid made me feel unclean.
As I was leaving I was again met by friends, new ones. They
were discussing the shameful betrayal by Daladier in Munich who had thwarted the burning desire of the French people to
go to war against Hitler in defense of Czechoslovakia.
I listened to them in wonder. They were intelligent, educated
men and women, most of them in the learned professions, how could they be that ignorant? I explained to them that the French people did not want to fight, Daladier was a hero to them for averting war. Now it was their turn to be incredulous,
hadn’t I read this article in the Daily War/(er, or that one in the Inpreeor? How stupid of them, of course I couldn’t know what was going on in the world, after all I had just come from
Spain, I had been isolated.
I retorted acidly I had just spent six days in France, had met
all sorts of people in Le Havre, including the striking seamen- the French were completely demoralized, they would rather make a pact with the devil than go to war.
That broke up the party. Some of the comrades gave me
quizzical looks, others began to soothe me:
"Don’t get worked up. We know what you have been through,
after a good rest you'll be back to normal."
By now it was late afternoon, there was still time to go up to the Daily Worker and the Central Committee, but I thought to
hell with that. I wandered around taking in the familiar sights 448

of New York without absorbing much. My thoughts were re-
volving hazily without any clear ideas emerging. Now and then I stopped for another hot dog, another cup of coHee, then went
to the apartment that unknown comrade had so trustingly offered to the party.
The apartment was full of modern prints and books and
smelled of perfume and powder, making me wish she were
there, whatever she looked like. I felt low and in strong need of feminine companionship. I considered going to one of those
party receptions to pick up a woman, yet the thought of the stupid adulation to which I would be subjected repelled me, nor was I in the mood to take any more of that cocksure party
spouting to which I had been exposed since I stepped off the boat. I went out, located a liquor store, bought myself a Hfth
and went back to the apartment.
I drank myself stupid that night, the first and only time I
ever went on a solitary drunk. I bummed to myself all the
Spanish revolutionary songs I knew until I came to the Inter- nationale. I sang that in English, and loud. I repeated the chorus
over and over until the words actually became animated and leered at me: "THE INTERNATIONAL SOVIET SHALL BE THE HUMAN RACE." They wouldn't go away and I
got mad. I smashed the glass against the fireplace, tore off my clothes and went to bed.
449

E ICIO
E
58 E THE editorial ofIices of the Daily Worker were E
much neater, cleaner, and better equipped than when I had last seen them nearly two years before. The comrades also were better dressed, their shirts were clean, their collars were not
frayed, they all wore ties and most of them were shaved. The
party and the paper had evidently prospered. They gave me a good reception. I was still a hero, albeit a smaller one—having had a hand in the making of many a proletarian hero those
comrades had a better perspective.
The Daily Worker wanted to put me to work right away-—
they were trying to build up the circulation of the Sunday
Worker and claimed I was just the right man for it. I was to take over the editorship of the Sunday Worker Supplement
and turn it into a popular literary magazine written in a non—
party style that every worker and housewife could understand. Such a magazine circulated by the party throughout the coun-
try in hundreds of thousands, even millions of copies, would have a tremendous impact and infiuence on the people. It was
an alluring project yet I refused, as I did the alternative offers to join the New York staff of the Daily Worker, or to revive the Daily Worker Ohio Bureau again. I told them I had a year of absence coming and intended to take it.
My reception at the Central Committee was also good. Here I was no hero, only a leading comrade returning successfully
from an assignment.
Joe Peters, in charge of the organizational department of the
45°

Central Committee (the head of the Party’s spy apparatus as I
learned later from Whittaker Chambers’ testimony), had grown
a pothelly since I last saw him. Although politically we had been on opposite sides in the Hungarian factional struggle there
was no enmity between us. After I insisted I was definitely not going back to the Daily Worker, Peters offered me a number of
positions in the party apparatus, to send me to any place in the country I wished on special assignments. I declined those offers, too, agreeing only that I’d see him after my leave of absence.
When finally I had myself announced to Alpi, known as Com- rade Fred Brown, he came flying out of his oflice. A Latin, he embraced me, a long-lost brother back from the war. He felt
my arms, checked me all over, asked me, his eyes sparkling, how his special assignment had worked out? He was happy
when I grinned and told him I did manage to get around. He asked me to wait until he could get rid of a few of his appoint-
ments, then he would close shop and we’d go to some small Italian place where we could talk without interruption. Minor and Gates had already made their reports to the Central Com-
mittee, he was now most eager to hear my account to get a real
perspective.
The small bodega in the Village was quiet and restful, the
pairan left us discreetly alone after our meal, silently replacing the empty bottles with fresh red vino from time to time. As
my story unfolded Alpi grew more and more downcast and
depressed, and only when he heard me conclude that the Fascist
victory was a matter of a few months at the most, did he rouse himself to argue against it.
He told me that my account was entirely contrary to the re-
ports given by Gates and Minor whose unanimous conclusions were that Loyalist Spain was absolutely determined to fight to the death and if the party concentrated all its efforts on lifting the arms embargo in the U.S., the victory of the Loyalists was certain. He was in agreement with them.
453

My reaction was bitter. Minor was a senile idiot, Johnny Gates an overambitious careerist hell—bent to make his way into
top party leadership by whatever means. Alpi was a military man, I reminded him, let’s forget politics, let’s forget the Comintern thesis on the Spanish situation, let’s hold in abeyance the analyses of the Soviet military experts, what the hell else
would they say except to confirm the party line. Let’s look at facts as I had found them. I ticked them off, one by one, many in the form of questions.
What good are planes, howitzers, even battleships and de-
stroyers, without trained personnel to man them?
How long does it take to train artillerymen? How long does
it take to train enough pilots, navigators, ground crews, artillery ofiicers out of men who, no matter how determined and brave, often lack primary, not to mention secondary schooling? Those were the youth we had on our side in Spain—the Fascists had most of the educated ones.
Who would man those arms and weapons even if they were
to reach Spain in time, read the instruments, figure the artillery
tables, when one of the greatest weaknesses of the Loyalist Army
was the lack of soldiers sufficiently literate to be developed into
competent noncommissioned ofiicers, without whom no modern
army can function echiently?
I told him about a recent shipment of brand-new heavy ma—
chine guns I had heard about, stored away in the military ware- houses in Barcelona, lying there unused because it takes men with good training to operate heavy machine guns and Loyalist
Spain did not have even a fraction of those.
Alpi listened in silence, his head bowed over the table, his
fingers playing with the crumbs from the breadsticks on the red—checkered tablecloth, maneuvering them as if an army.
"Take the Loyalist Army!" The Spanish were brave and self—
sacrificing, excellent troops where they had good leadership in the field, but essentially they were soldiers of mood. They would
452

rush enthusiastically into fire when pepped up with calls to their courage and loyalty—they would break just as fast when met with unexpected resistance. Furthermore, the withdrawal of the Internationals had broken their spirit. They felt we had abandoned them because their ship was sinking, leaving them to drown. I quoted him what some of the bravest and the best of their officers and men had told me after we officially withdrew
from the brigade. I also told him about the general attitude of the nonparty Spanish populace, nationalists, trade unionists, so cialists, anarchists whom I had met in person.
Next, the Spanish Party itself was guilty of a grave error in
policy. True, it had gained an immense following but still not sufficient to sway the majority. Because of the soft—pedalling of
its revolutionary aims, its failure to call for the expropriation of
the capitalists and the distribution of land its own followers
were getting dissatisfied, while the nonparty majority was begin—
ning to resent more and more the party’s ruthless drive for absolute control.
That was the picture. The Loyalist government could not pos-
sibly resist for long. At this stage it wasn’t arms alone that
Loyalist Spain needed for its survival, but also armed assistance: trained French Divisions under French military commanders,
and since the French could definitely not be counted upon to intervene, a hundred thousand or more Red Army trained Soviet volunteers transported by sea like Mussolini’s Fascist Legions, experienced flyers and technicians like those Hown in by Hitler.
Alpi’s response was low. "You know that is impossible, that would involve the Soviet Union in war."
I wasn’t ready to concede that fully. However, I told Alpi there was one thing the party and the Soviet Union could safely do—come out for some sort of negotiated settlement be- tween the Loyalists and Franco, along the lines the British had
recently proposed. Make a world-wide drive for armistice, am- 453

nesty, and plebiscite, enlisting the support of all democratic na- tions for international guarantees of no reprisals by either side.
That was the only way left to save the millions in Loyalist ter-
ritory from the savage, bloody reprisals openly threatened by Franco.
Alpi was dejected. My report was contrary to all reports from the Comintern, contrary to the party line, to the policy of the
Soviet Union, he murmured.
"Let me write a detailed report, a true and factual one," I
pleaded. "I could get that out in a few days. You submit that to the Central Committee and cable it directly to the Comintern. We must save what we can of Loyalist Spain, the least we will
accomplish is staving off a massacre. The civilized world will support us in that drive."
Alpi was in anguish.
"You know, Voros, that’s impossible, you know I can’t do that.
You know the Comintern line is the line of Moscow. You know I can’t go against that."
His usually deep, resonant voice was now a low whisper, I detected a tremble in it. He wasn’t talking to me, he was talking to himself.
We rose without a further word. This was Alpi, the one—time fearless leader of the armed Italian revolutionary bands, the most sincere man among all the top leaders of the various Com- munist Parties I had come across. He understood the Spanish situation, my report merely confirmed what he had surmised was the truth. He was appalled by the savage reprisals that awaited the Spanish people, yet—even he wouldn’t dare act con—
trary to the party line, tragically wrong as he knew it to be. As we shook hands, he asked me what I wanted to do, he
would find the kind of a party position best suited to my in- clinations. I said I would call on him as soon as I was ready but I knew that would he never.
I walked the streets of New York all the rest of that day, more 454

‘7",e.r
depressed than I had ever felt in my life, cursing the party and the party leadership from Stalin down to Alpi. They were all
a bunch of bastards, stooges every one of them. I cursed and swore they would never again trick me into accepting any party
function, they would never again maneuver me into a position where I could not say what I thought, where I would have to subordinate my principles to a line handed down from above. Had I been more coherent, I could have expressed it succinctly:
"No more thought control for me!"
Why didn’t I quit the party then?
That’s just exactly what I thought of doing. As I passed the
headquarters of the New York Newspaper Guild I felt like
going up to the club, stepping up to the bar, ordering up a drink for everyone and then offering the toast:
"Here is to Stalin, and the Communists, may they all burn in hell!" and then tearing up my party card. ‘
It was a most gratifying emotional outburst and I kept relish-
ing that picture in my mind, until reason took over. What was I trying to do, play into the hands of the Fascists?
Fascism was marching Victoriously toward world domination, its confidence in victory growing with every new appeasement. The Fascists were the Herrem/olk, openly proclaiming them— solves the Master Race predestined to rule with blood and iron over the enslaved masses. The democracies were burrowing in
cowardly fashion every man deeper in his own tent awaiting the very great slaughter. The only hope of standing up against
Fascism lay in the Soviet Union, the only country that could be counted upon not to appease Hitler. Much as I hated Stalin my
place was still on his side; much as the ideals of Communism were violated in actual practice in the Soviet Union and by the Communist Parties everywhere, they still paid at least lip service to them, holding out the hope for a better and more just society.
Yet I found no comfort in my reasoning. As I paced street after street in a greatly depressed state some lines by a revolu—
455

tionary poet suddenly came to my mind. I did not recall his
name, nor the actual wording, only the content of what he said.
"We, Communists, are condemned men. We live in a prison, whether in or out."
That poet meant the prison of capitalism. But I knew better, Communism was a prison, too. Since I couldn’t choose to live in the prison of Fascism, all I had left was the prison of Com- munism. What the hell choice was that?
Condemned men have no choice. And I was one of them.
456

.w—WrwLn‘mwr
59 El IHADonelastofiicialpieceofbusinesstoattend
to. I went back to Ohio for my formal leave of absence from the party. I was a hero again, a great hero with mass meetings and public receptions scheduled. I ducked them all, including the big ceremonial banquet given by the Hungarians in my honor—I couldn’t bear to be toasted in celebration of a non- existent victory while Hernandez, Diaz, and the rest of my
comrades were left fighting to the death.
I did agree, though, to address a meeting of the Cleveland
Newspaper Guild. It was a cautious talk; I skirted the party line about Spain and partied questions about it. It wasn’t a good
lecture—the newsmen sensed I was holding back but were sym-
pathetic enough not to press me.
The next day, Paul Bellamy, editor and publisher of the Cleve-
land Plain Dealer, sent a message: would I come and see him? The party was excited about it. What a wonderful break for
propaganda in the capitalist press!
Bellamy received me with cordial informality. He put me at ease quickly with a few remarks of sympathy for Loyahst
Spain and then the interview began. It was off the record and
by the time I finished answering him I saw the Spanish Civil War in a far clearer perspective than at any time in Spam. His
questions organized my unassorted facts, my undefined thoughts and conclusions into a coherent whole and I answered him truth-
m
457
"W~m‘:rTw-ur—(y
fully.
m: » ,gu

K
At the close of the interview Bellamy unexpectedly offered me a job on the foreign desk.
"But I am a Communist," I gulped.
Bellamy didn’t mind that. He was gambling that I would con- tinue to maintain the same objectivity I had manifested in our
talk. My understanding of Communist aims might even be an asset in appraising the international situation which showed signs of boiling over at any moment.
My heart leaped at his answer. Here was an opportunity to do real journalistic work for a change, also financial security.
This was still the depression and all I had between me and starvation was a few travelers checks, less than $200, all that was left of my life’s savings. Bellamy was waiting for my decision.
I took a deep breath, thanked him, and regretfully declined his offer. After refusing to work for the Daily Worker I couldn’t have taken a job on a capitalist newspaper, that would have been
interpreted as a betrayal of the party.
Back at party headquarters the comrades were disappointed
with my sketchy report. All I would say was that Bellamy per-
sonally showed sympathy with Spain. They wanted to know whether I could persuade Bellamy to lead a fight for the lifting
of the arms embargo. I answered in the negative. I couldn’t tell them that my answer to Bellamy concerning the embargo was the same that I had given to Comrade Alpi, that it was too late for that, that the best way the US. Government could help the
Spanish people at this stage would be by negotiating for an armistice with guarantees of no reprisals on either side.
John Williamson, Ohio District Organizer, recognizing I was deaf to all offers of party jobs, tried to bargain with me to stay
on temporarily to reorganize party finances. He thought I could do a wonderful job at raising money; with my record in Spain and my wide circle of acquaintances I ought to be able to tap sources that had never contributed. As a start I ought to hit up Bellamy for a big contribution for Spanish aid. That really
458

settled it. I told him I wasn’t well, I had to have time off to get back in shape. The final agreement was that although I was entitled to an official leave of absence, I still had to attend party meetings in order not to lose touch with the party but I was exempted from carrying out assignments—released on parole, so to speak.
I was free at last! "No more orders and regulations for me,"
I kept repeating to myself as I boarded the bus to New York.
It had taken ten years from the time I accepted that temporary
assignment to the Uj Elorc, but I was finally free.
It was a great letdown. I should have been elated but I wasn’t.
I was free to do what? To go back to my old life? That was im-
possible. I couldn’t escape into the past—my blessed ignorance and indifference to politics was gone forever. My past associa—
tions, even my family ties were severed—we no longer lived in the same world or talked the same language.
I was free—or was I? What was freedom? I was casting
myself off from the ship on which I had sailed for ten years to
navigate alone on a solitary raft with no clear destination in mind. Was that freedom?
It didn’t seem so. A free man is supposed to be a happy one. Which I was definitely not!
459
