






I reported to Comrade Fiala, Chief of the Historical Com mission-a tall, broad-shouldered, close-mouthed Pole.

A few minutes' discussion carried on in halting German which we both spoke with an equally heavy accent, his Polish, mine Hungarian, soon made it clear to me that Fiala had only a vague conception of how to get the Historical Commission started. Nor did he indicate any marked inclination to stick his political neck out by taking the initiative.

All he had done was to ask the Base Command to send out a letter to all commands in the International Brigades asking them to forward to our commission all documents, including the plans and orders pertaining to their past battles. Fiala's idea was that once those documents came in, and we had to allow time for that, we'd go over them and analyze them. He was rather hazy about what we were to look for in those documents and on what basis we were to evaluate them.

Fiala was a highly intelligent person, a member of the Polish Bureau of the Comintern, in civilian life a Communist pro fessor of history. He was a bureaucrat of the Soviet mold, insulated by layers of suspicion and mistrust he had acquired

in the illegal Polish underground Communist movement and more particularly during the years he had lived under the shadow of the purges in Moscow. It took quite an effort to get through to him. I was the first American he had encountered with whom he had a chance to speak at length and he asked me , many questions about the way the Party operated in America. My candid replies both fascinated and shocked him; they evi

dently strengthened his conviction that we were just amateurs blithely unconcerned about the most elementary rules of con spiratorial technique, a bunch of overgrown kids playing at revolution and bragging about it.

I showed him my memos on my interviews with the few early Lincoln members who had been transferred to Almansa, also the few diaries I had collected from them. That bit of news

329

I

THE ALBACETE GENERALS

On the front of Albacete Meet the generals of the rear. Ohl They fight the grandest batdes Though the shells they never hear, For the wind is in their make-up. You can hear the generals say: "Yes, we're going to Jarama Manana or next day." . . . See them strolling in the evening To the grogshops for their wine, For they are the brave defenders Of the Albacete line.

-Anonymous British 1.B. Volunteer

, "I "

ii

",

' I ' I I

ra ra ra

buzzing beehive of Albacete, the base of the International Bri gades, was like the awakening of Rip van Winkle-it took time to adjust.

Albacete, peacetime population 40,000, capital of the province of the same name in southeastern Spain, had been swollen by war refugees and the Internationals to more than three times its normal size. The Internationals dominated the town. The best public buildings and private residences had been taken over by I.B. Headquarters for their offices-its hotels, restaurants, cafes, two movies, streets and thoroughfares, whorehouses, vinoshops were thronged by volunteers from all corners of the world.

328

46 ra REPORTING from the isolation of Almansa to the

interested him greatly, now at least we had some "documents" to put into the files of the Historical Commission. Then I startled him with the proposal that instead of waiting for those "documents" to be forwarded to us I be authorized to go after them to the Brigades in the field, and asked him to get me a Salvo Conducto (literally "Safe Conduct," a military pass) for the front.

I spent the time waiting for that pass circulating around Albacete, striking up conversations and becoming friendly with volunteers of all ranks and nationalities. It was amazing how eager they were to open up after I convinced them their confi dences would be respected. I was shocked by my findings. In stead of international solidarity, dog eat dog seemed to be the rule governing the relationships of the various Communist Parties with one another; their leaderships were in cutthroat rivalry for the favor of Moscow.

Moreover, a great schism existed between the "Albacete generals," the recipients of political and military plums, the members of the LB. command, and the rank and file volunteers, particularly those among the rank and file who were officially pronounced "bad elements."

These "bad elements" were the crippled, the amputees, the men with half-healed wounds, the ill, the shell-shocked, the broken in spirit-the wrecks of those early volunteers who had stopped Franco at the gates of Madrid with little other equi ment than small arms and their willingness to offer up thelr ill-fed bodies for sacrifice. They were of all nationalities, French, Belgian, German, Irish, Scottish, Jewish, British, Slovak, Yugo slav, Czech, Polish, Hungarian, including quite a few Amer icans. They were swarming all over Albacete tramping frm office to office in search of prosthesis, repatriation, postoperatlve care, back pay, clothing, food, sleeping accommodations, politi cal advice, or merely a friendly word.

The "bad elements" were the rank and file survivors of those early desperately fought battles that had filled with glory the party press of every country. They were the first volunteers on the scene whose sacrifices formed the base for all the Commu

nist financial appeals, whose heroism raised the prestige of the Communist Parties with the intellectuals, liberals, and anti Fascists. However, the names publicized by the Communist Parties were seldom those of the rank and file who had suffered the most, but of those comrades whom the party wanted to build up. They became the "heroes" while these unfortunates, the

debris of those battles, became the "bad elements." These "bad elements" overflowed the streets, sitting on the curbs and park benches in their tattered uniforms, or simply leaning against the wall outside the offices, feeding each other's discontent by loud descriptions of their hardships, of the cowardice of many of their superior officers and commissars. These were the

multitudes found in every society since the dawn of history who were born to the dry teat and predestined for the bottom of the heap; whose misery gave birth to Moses, to Christ, to Marx, to the Utopians.

It was easy to see why these "bad elements" felt themselves betrayed by the party. They had been made to believe that they were volunteering to join a "People's Army" where all would share the vicissitudes of war equally. Then came the shock of

reality; they found themselves under a military rule paralleling that of the Soviet Union where caste differentiation and the privileges enjoyed by officers and commissars were incom parably greater than those existing in the armies of the capitalist countries.

The Americans, having been brought up in the easy demo cratic way of America, particularly resented this unexpected class differentiation between the comrades who were made officers and commissars and the comrades who remained in the

330

331

333

ranks. A number of American volunteers who were loudest in their complaints against the party leadership were ultimately made to pay for it with their lives in the jails of SIM.

At that time I merely noted those stories, suspending judg ment until they could be authenticated by filling in that six month gap in the history of the American volunteers that elapsed between their arrival and mine. That was difficult, for no official records were kept of that early period. Luck finally led me to George Brodsky who had been denounced to me by most of those early arrivals as the worst example of the be havior of Party leaders and commissars in Spain.

When I located him George Brodsky was being kept in seclusion by the party awaiting repatriation. I found him a broken old man although barely in his thirties. He wouldn't talk to me at first, he had been pledged to secrecy. When I finally induced him to confide in me, he not only talked, he spilled over.

. His account was not quite coherent-he was stIll unnerved

by his experiences, his eyes would dissolve in tears from time to time as he pleaded for my understanding.

necessary qualities of leadership and experience to enforce his authority.

They arrived in Spain on January 6, 1937, and were taken to the old Spanish fort Figueras near the French border, the as sembly center for the Internationals. The camp was run by the

French who proceeded to give the Americans their first taste of international solidarity in practice. The French comrades re ceived the Americans with hostility, unwilling to share their rations with them, and bivouacked them in the worst barrack

rooms, the floors of which were littered with human excrement. Many of the volunteers wanted to turn back immediately, others openly talked of desertion.

Brodsky had found himself right in the middle; the Amer icans were blaming him for their treatment by the French, while the French command held him responsible for the rebellious be havior of the Americans. As ranking party member Brodsky

next was appointed Albacete Base Commissar for all Americans who were now arriving daily in Spain. The French command in Albacete showed themselves equally discriminatory against Amer icans, keeping them on short rations, which demoralized the

Americans even more. Brodsky again was in the middle. The Americans raised

demands and insisted on conditions which they expected Brodsky to enforce with the LB. Command, with whom he carried no weight. The I.B. Command in turn, disgusted and contemptuous of those "spoiled cry-babies," those "arrogant Americans," held Brodsky responsible for their conduct. Considering them of little worth, they decided to disperse the Americans, to use them

as replacements for other units, the British and Irish particularly; thus denying them the opportunity to serve in units of their own under their own command. (It was the story of General Pershing versus Field Marshal Foch all over again, but Brodsky was no

Pershing nor did he have Old Black Jack's political backing.)

,!

The first group of volunteers, 96 in number, left New York on December 25, 1936, followed within days by other, more numerous groups. Except for five or six men with pre;ious military training in the peace-time regular army or the NatIOnal Guard none of those volunteers had a real conception of army



r had they been prepared for what they might encunter

life, n in Spain. Worse still, the party had sent them overseas wIthut assigning to them even a single leading party member With sufficient organizational experience who would have com manded their respect. In short, they were leaderless, which gave rise to immediate factional groupings. Thus the unity of the group was destroyed from the start. Officially, Brodsky had been placed in charge of the group in New York but he lacked the

'I ,

332

fa FIALA and I soon established a satisfactory work





in re

ationship.

lhough he and my other colleagues on the

Had Brodsky been an experienced party leader, had he been entrusted with authority to represent the Central Committee of the United States, had he been given a "silk ribbon," he could have taken a tougher stand, because ultimately all those matters were decided by the party. As it was, the existing situation was permitted to worsen and a number of Americans had actually been detached and sent to other units.

fafa

The story culminated in the Americans being sent to the J arama front without training, under a makeshift and inex 47 fa perienced command, which resulted in the death of a dis proportionately high number of them right at the outset of the battle. The surviving volunteers again blamed Brodsky for that and cried for his head.

Brodsky was eventually removed and a few days after our talk whisked back by the party to the United States in igno minious secrecy. He was still absolutely loyal to the party when we had our talk-he was not sufficiently astute politically to comprehend that the enormous weight of guilt for the needless death of those comrades which had brought about his break down was not his but rested with the Central Committee of the American party for entrusting the fate of hundreds into such inexperienced hands.

Incidentally, other early American contingents had similarly sorry experiences with their political leaders, as will be seen sub sequently in Major Merriman's account . This explains why the political leaders of the LB., the "Albacete Generals" from Andre Marty down, were held in such contempt by the average volunteer.

All hosannas in the Daily Worker and other party publications to the contrary notwithstanding-most volunteers hated the guts of those party leaders.

335

thority.

334

mission without official authorization, and issued my own Saltlo

Hlstoncal CommlsslOn were content to wait docilely until the "documents" from the combat units of the LB. arrived he had

jection, in rinciple, against my going after them in person 

no o provlde responsIbIlIty for my individual action. That suited me fine. There was but one drawback. Fiala either couldn't or wouldn't get a SaltlO Conducto for me from the Base Military Command and was horrified at the suggestion that as Jete of the I.B. His



1

.

proffilsed to keep him out of trouble and accepted the

.

torical Commission he should issue me one on his own au

If he was worried about acting as a Jete, I wasn't. I was a Jete too, "Chief of the Anglo-American Section," so I decided to have some official letterheads printed, talked a worried en graver into making a rubber stamp for the Historical Com

Conducto. I signed it myself, then stamped it-that's all there was to it. Fiala was jittery over this unprecedented act but I mollified him by presenting that stamp to him for the use of the Historical Commission. He was certain that pass wouldn't be honored but he proved wrong. I traveled with that Saltlo Con ducto all over Spain, into every war zone where the Interna ional Brigades fought, without having it challenged once and It gave me entry into all headquarters I cared to visit.

The pass I drew up was simple. It was typed on a letterhead which bore in print the heading:

HISTORICAL CoMMISSION OF THE INTERNATIONAL BRIGADES

Salvo Conducto

Permission is hereby granted to Comrade Sandor Voros, Chief of the Anglo-American Section of the Historical Commission of the International Brigades, to visit all units of the International Brigades. Comrade Voros is on an important and confidential mission for the Historical Commission of the International Brigades.

The commanders of all army units are requested to facilitate his travel and to give him their utmost co-operation for the successful fulfillment of his mission.

(Stamped)

Historical Commission of the International Brigades

(Stamped again for good measure) (Signed) Sandor Voros

Chief of the Anglo-American Section of the Historical Commission of the International Brigades

I had that translated into Spanish by our interpreter who added a few muchisimos and a couple of flowery phrases of his own volition, and I was in business.

My first trip was to Tarazona to visit Joe Dallet; I was eager to see him for old friendship's sake. I was also disturbed about the rumors circulating about him in Albacete which I found difficult to credit and I wanted to see for myself.

The first complaint I heard about Dallet was voiced by Jack Delehenty who had delivered Joe's note to me in Almansa. Delehenty pleaded with me to have him transferred out of Dallet's unit to the artillery (eventually I managed to arrange that) because of Dallet's intolerable dictatorial behavior. Dele henty claimed that Dallet was universally hated by all men in

336

te training camp. Jack was a young boy about twenty and I did not take his opinion seriously, but later in Albacete I met up with many other volunteers from Tarazona who were unani mous in their condemnation of Dallet, which made me wonder.

I had known Joe Dallet for years. The last time I saw him in Youngstown he was still the hard-working, somewhat naive, solemn young organizer rather on the shy side who had often been criticized by the District for his lack of aggressive leader

I couldn't make that picture of Joe jibe with the ones pre sented of him by those men.

I did not know then how quickly and easily power can cor rupt-especially Communists who are conditioned to -it.

ship.

he thought Joe was doing a good job trying to instill discipline in the battalion but perhaps he was somewhat highhanded and bureaucratic about it.

Joe Dallet welcomed me in friendly fashion. However, there was an unwonted reserve in his behavior which I couldn't help

-

48

iaiaia

gloated. "A man stands on his own merit here and has a chance to show what he can really do."

This must have been a reference to our Ohio Bureau which had consistently criticized him about the haphazard quality of his work. I changed that subject quickly, congratulated him on his position, the highest then held by any American, equivalent to the rank of major, and asked him to tell me about his job.

He paced up and down, a tall, gaunt young man not yet thirty with a big mop of unruly dark hair, sucking on a vile smelling Sherlock Holmes type pipe, giving me a lecture on the duties of a commissar taken verbatim from the same pamphlet I was then carrying in my pocket to brief myself on the sub ject. I let him talk on for a while then interrupted him, saying I wanted to know how he was translating those principles into practice.

His answer was revealing, far more revealing than I was in a position to judge then. Although he had been in his post less than three months he had become fully impregnated with that exalted feeling of self-importance which, as I had occasion to learn later, characterized most of those comrades in Spain who had suddenly found themselves elevated from obscure party posts into positions of great authority. Trained in the dictatorial practices prevailing in all Communist Parties these comrades became drunk with power and gloried in the knowledge that here in Spain at last they were in a position to enforce their dictates by jail sentences and even the firing squad.

I cannot think of a more shocking illustration of the above point than the remark made by Dave Doran, then newly ap pointed commissar of the XV Brigade, at a banquet honoring a visiting delegation of the American League Against War and Fascism. Those delegates, mostly well-meaning, liberal American women of the middle classes, were particularly intrigued by Dave's youth, he was twenty-eight, and the important position he held. They plied him with questions about the power he, as

pompous and overriding autocrat who gloried in his power over them; they even accused him of appropriating the cigarettes, tobacco' and other supplies sent from America for his own use to lead a life of luxury. Only Lieutenant Jack Cooper, a leading comrade of the Y.C.L. in Cleveland, commander of the bat talion's machine gun section, had a good word to say for Dallet;

right and left by comrades who knew me from the States. Their morale in general was low. Many of them wished that they had never volunteered, others were wishing to be sent to the front in a hurry, partly because they were eager to come to grips with the Fascists and partly to escape that camp. The military com mander of the camp, Captain (later Major) Merriman was uni versally liked and respected, so was Lieutenant Bob Thompson, second in command, although to a lesser degree. The discontent of the volunteers, amounting to near hatred, was directed against Joe, the Battalion Commissar. They considered him a

remarks were mocking.

noting. His first words after the usual exchange of personal "I bet you found Spain different than you thought ! " he

ia TARAZONA was another small Spanish town not far from Albacete. As I walked into the camp I was hailed

340

341

Brigade Commissar, wielded. Dave, who was visibly expanding under their adoration, straightened up in his chair and, sur veying that huge table where, besides the delegates, most of the brigade staff were seated, asserted with pride :

"Well, I can have anyone seated at this table shot!"

The visiting delegates received this information with rapture, that was really something to take back home, to impress their friends with the importance of an American commissar they had encountered in person in Spain. It did not occur to any of them to inquire what could possibly have distorted the mind of a man that young to think of his position in those terms; to en tertain the idea that it was within his power to order anyone in his sight, civilians and military personnel alike, plae before a firing squad and executed at his whim. The ternfymg fact was that although Doran had no such authority, he had the actual power to do so and he could easily have excused such an action by charging his victims with, let's say, "counterrevolu tionary Trotskyism," and even earned a further promotion thereby.

that mental state although the path he was following in Tara zona was leading in that direction. In his talk with me he kept harping on two words, "morale" and "discipline." He was deter mined to raise the morale of his battalion by the strictest meas ures against the "bad elements" whose conduct was a "disgrce to the Communist Party." His ideas on discipline were monastIC: the men had to be regimented all their waking hours, denied leaves, prohibited from playing cards, from visiting the vino shops or, horrors, the bordellos. Those violating any of these regulations were severely punished. In addition, after drill the

men were subjected to hours of daily "political education." I remembered those deadly monotonous political lectures we had been forced to attend in Almansa, telling us why Fascism and

capitalism were bad and the Soviet Union and Communism were good, why we had to fight Fascism when our very pres ence in Spain was proof how well aware we were of that. I tried to point that out to Joe but he brushed that aside, he even ques

Tioned me, did I "actually oppose political education ? " I had sense enough to deny that heresy promptly.

I asked Joe whether the disparateness between the living stand ards of a battalion commissar and his men had anything to do with the discontent. The pay of a commissar was 600 pesetas every ten days, in contrast to the 60 pesetas the men were re

ceiving; also, he lived luxuriously compared to their monotonous fare. Wasn't that situation a factor? He rejected that, saying that it was not he who had set that large differential pay rate for officers and commissars; besides, it was more than just that officers who had all the responsibility should have preferential

treatment. In fact, the one other thing he was going to root out in his battalion was the perverted idea held by the volunteers that the I.B. was supposed to be a people's army where both commanders and men received the same pay and rations on the

basis of democratic equality. Such notions undermined discipline and an army had to be run by discipline. He was out to set an example, and speaking of example, he had assured his men time and time again that they could depend on his setting an example in battle and come the time, he would be the first man out of

the trenches to lead the attack in person. He was to keep that promise. The last time I met him was in

early October 1937, just before the Mackenzie-Papineau Battalion was scheduled to meet its baptism of fire by going into an attack at Fuentes del Ebro. It was around ten o'clock at night by the time I located him. I found him sitting alone in a small hut by the dim light of an oilwick. He was very lonely; he greeted me with genuine warmth this time, grateful for my presence.

I had come to learn his immediate orders and plans pertaining to

But that was still in the future. Joe Dallet had never reached

the impending battle but Joe was more interested in recalling the past, our personal exploits in Ohio, confiding that he felt completely isolated from everyone. Although I assured him that in my observation his battalion was in far superior battle shape than any of our other battalions on the eve of their first battle, which could be attributed mainly to his unflagging efforts, he knew that his men were not appreciative and that he was un popular with them.

He kept repeating he would now prove to them by his per sonal example that he had had only their welfare in mind in driving them hard to become good soldiers; he would be the first over the parapet to demonstrate he was not one of those "safe behind the line Albacete generals," but a leader who fully shared the dangers to which he exposed his men.

I tried to reason him out of that obsession. I remonstrated that it was a poor way to provide leadership for an entire bat talion, that by jumping off with the first wave he would lose control of directing the battle, which was his main responsibil ity. But Joe was adamant. He insisted on proving himself to his men and I left him with a heavy heart.

He saw me shivering in the cold outdoors and presented me with his own poncho, a charcoal black, warm woolen one, far superior to those issued by the Loyalist Army, also with a pistol. Pistols sold at a high price and I couldn't afford one. Despite my position I ranked as a private and my pay was only six pesetas a day. Before we parted, Joe indulged in a, for him, unusual gesture. He put his arm around me and told me to remember him.

Joe DaUet remained true to his promise. He was the first one out of the trenches after giving the signal for the attack and was cut down immediately after advancing but a few yards toward the Fascist lines. He was hit in the groin and suffered agonies, yet he waved back the First-Aid men, refusing to let them risk sure death in an attempt to reach him. He was try-

Requiescat . . .

T

ing to crawl back unaided when a fresh burst from a machine Joe knew he had to die to redeem the prestige of a commissar



is own eyes the path he had followed in Spain a VIctIm of hIS own Communist training.

to j.us.tify in

342 343

gun blasted life out of him.

345

rarara 49 ra I SPENT three days visiting with the men in Tara

zona, seeking out those early volunteers who might help me to piece together a record of the Americans from their first ar rival in Spain. Captain Merriman, then Commander of the Mac-Pap Battalion, was one of those first arrivals, in fact he had been the Commander of the Lincoln Battalion when it was first thrown into action at Jarama.

Captain Merriman was one of those rare men who radiate strength and inspire confidence by their very appearance. He was tall and broad-shouldered with a ruddy bronze complexion over laying his originally pink skin; thin flax-colored hair framed his bald pink scalp. The physical strength of the athlete combined with the reserved manners of the scholar and the introspective expression in his eyes bespoke great inner power.

Robert Hale Merriman was born in 1908 near the West Coast of Scotch-English parents. His father was a lumberjack, his mother a writer-a combination that left its marks on his sub sequent career.

Because of poverty he left home at an early age and worked his way through high school-as a janitor in a bank, as a part time grocery clerk, and occasionally a window trimmer. After finishing high school he considered he had enough of an educa tion and began traveling around the country, working now in a logging camp felling trees, sometimes as a millwright and pulp feeder, and once, for a stretch, as Number Three Man in a paper mill.

344

In one of those logging camps he met an extraordinary Irish man who was to exert a great influence on his future life. That Irishman would work hard for six months, then quit, spending the other six months of the year in public libraries, studying what ever happened to engage his interest. This way of life attracted Merriman. If studying was that much fun he too would take it up again, and as long as he was to do that, he might as well go to college.

Merriman had very little money saved but he knew that a young man six feet two weighing 190 pounds who had played football in high school ought not to find it difficult to get a scholarship. He applied to the University of Nevada and was immediately accepted; he played end on the varsity football team and even joined a fraternity until he suddenly found himself in the middle of a Nevada winter with gaping holes in his soles and an empty pocket trying to major in economics.

The leaking shoes presented no real problem-he stuck card board inside them. But money presented a twin problem, how to make it and how to save it. He tackled the second one first. As an economy move he resigned from Sigma Mu, which caused a great scandal on campus. That was the first time anyone had voluntarily resigned his valued membership in that great fraternity.

As an immediate solution to the problem of making money he joined the R.O.T.C. which paid $7.50 a month, an income which he eked out by trying his hand again at window decorat ing. The highest point of financial affluence he ever reached in that period came when he succeeded in obtaining a job in a marathon dance contest as a janitor to keep the floor waxed between the feet of the dancing couples and to sweep away the chewing gum wrappers, orange peels, and other waste products of that great contribution to the culture of the thirties. His sum mer vacations were spent working alternately as a cement mixer at a naval ammunition depot and as a ditch digger for a water

company and, when nothing better was to be found, as a hay hand on a ranch.

Upon graduation he became Assistant Instructor of Economics at the University of California where in his second year he ad vanced to Head Assistant Instructor. At about this time, when examining the contrast between the theories of classical eco nomics he was teaching and the actual facts of life around him in the depression, he was led to conclude that Marx was right about capitalism. That conclusion in turn led to the deduction that to be true to his conscience it behooved him to do something about the existing state of affairs.

The least he thought he could do was help to improve the sorry lot of the migratory workers who were then cruelly ex ploited by the great growers of California. He was not ready to go all the way and join the Communist Party because he con sidered the routine of the party much too confining. Instead he joined one of the convenient auxiliary organizations set up by the party for precisely that purpose, the International Labor De fense. Soon he became most active in the I.L.D. East Bay Com mittee. He organized IL.D. branches at the University and took an active part in the defense of the Imperial Valley strikers in 1933 whose demands for a living wage and more tolerable sani tary conditions were met by court injunctions and brutal physi cal assaults, arrests, and vicious jail sentences. His activities in the I.L.D. also involved him in other bitter strikes in that area in which the shedding of blood and crippling beatings by vigi lantes and professional strikebreakers were everyday occurrence.

The next phase in Merriman's life started with his winning the Newton Booth Traveling Fellowship in Economics for a field trip in Europe. Money again became a pressing problem, for he needed more funds for the study he wanted to undertake than the Fellowship provided. In addition, he was saddled with the responsibility of partially supporting the family of his girl friend, later his wife, Marion. (She herself would merit a separate

346

study-a brave, wholesome American girl-because of her ad mirable behavior in Spain where she j oined her husband in Tarazona . )

Robert Hale Merriman, holder of the Newton Booth Fellow ship, Head Instructor of Economics at the great University of California, knew of only one way to make more money than his academic salary which barely provided a minimum subsistence -manual labor. In consequence he quit teaching at the Univer sity and went to work as a body-polisher in the Ford assembly plant in Richmond. The speed-up and unhealthy working condi tions in that plant proved too much even for his sturdy frame. When a few brave souls in the plant whispered about organiza tion, Merriman joined with them and helped to get out an illegal shop paper, the first one to make its surreptitious appearance in that plant. Merriman wrote the editorial for it, his first, "What's the Meaning of Industrial Democracy ? "

He quit his job with Ford to go to work on an economic re search project for F.E.R.A. on "Current Changes Survey: Sea sonal Variations." Later he became supervisor of a medical sur vey in San Francisco; still later, State Supervisor of "Current Changes Study" in California. He made use of his position to hire as many radicals as the payroll would hold who, because of their views, had difficulty in getting placements. During the San Francisco general strike in 1934 he took charge of publicity, rather counterpublicity, to keep football players from signing up with Coach "Navy Bill" Ingram who was then recruiting a spe cial contingent of football players for strikebreaking.

By 1935, Merriman had saved up enough to make use of his scholarship for European travel. He went to the Soviet Union to study on the spot the application of Marxian economics. He studied at the Institute of Economics in Moscow and afterward spent eight months living on various collective farms, making notes of their operation and compiling statistics. His experiences with collective farming in the U.S.S.R. made him curious to

347

know what farming was like in Eastern Europe. He went on an extended trip to Greece, the Balkans, Hungary, and then re turned to Moscow to write a book about his findings. He was in the midst of his book when the Spanish Civil War broke out. At first the Soviet Union kept hands off. But when it decided to help the Loyalists strong pressure was brought on all non Russians in Moscow to join the International Brigades in Spain. Merriman was made to feel ashamed that not a single American was at that time fighting in the International Brigades; he was

reproached at every turn for being engaged in the frivolous pastime of writing a book while Fascism was nakedly endeavor ing to strangle all humanity. So Merriman left Moscow and landed in Spain on January II, 1937.

The account that follows is my memo of that interview, typed out hastily for the raw files of the Historical Commission, in corporating data he permitted me to copy from his diary :

ADD HISTORY LINCOLN

INTERVIEW WITH CAPT. ROBERT HALE MERRIMAN, FIRST COMMANDER LINCOLN BArr'N.

July 11-12, 1937 Merriman arrived in Spain from the Soviet Union where he was studying economics and agriculture on a scholarship, on

January I I, 1937. He came here without any knowledge about the existence of

other American volunteers. He contacted representatives of In ternational' Brigades in Valencia. They sent him to Villa Nueva de la Jara to join the Americans who had landed a few days before-about a hundred men.

Arriving at Villa Nueva he found the Americans in turmoil. It seemed the command wanted to put the Americans in with the Irish, and the Americans refused. There was strong friction between the two groups-the Americans allegedly sober, earnest, enthusiastic, and idealistic, the Irish drunken and fighting.

348

The Americans lacked both political and military leadership. The first volunteers were almost religiously anti-Fascist, the over whelming majority of them party members.

When he arrived, Merriman found a grievance committee al ready established consisting of Royce, Morris, and Bernie Walsh. [Walsh later transferred to the artillery in Almansa-S .V.] Stern acted as political commissar. James Harris was their mili tary leader (at present with Dombrowsky battalion) . The day Merriman arrived Hagilow, Acting Sergeant, had arrested and brought in as a prisoner, Comrade Ferrari who was second in command, charging him with being a Fascist.

Met Stamber for the first time who was supposed to be their political leader; Stamber complained he was slighted by the com rades under him because he was not a member of the Central Committee.

There wasn't even a semblance of military organization. The military commander arrested the political commissar. The politi cal commissar in turn arrested the military commander. The grievance committee of three took on the function of both mili tary and political commands as well as that of a tribunal. Party fraction meetings were held with arbitrary invitations. Those party members not invited went into a funk, protested decisions; wouldn't accept decisions.

Stamber and Merriman were called to Albacete to see Marty. Marty was very angry with the Americans, called them spoiled children, and threatened to send them back home unless they snapped out of it. He gave them a party leaflet dealing, strangely, with the agrarian question, and told them to study it carefully because that represented the official position of the party on the Spanish question. Col. Vidal, commander of the Albacete I.B. base, was also present at the conference.

Following the conference Vidal, Stamber, and Merriman went out to Villa Nueva and held a meeting with the men. Col. Vidal told them the Loyalist Army was not a Communist Army and

349

r

explained the function of the military commander and the politi I cal commissar.

The men were greatly surprised at the news. They had thought they were to function the way a party unit does at home, under the leadership of their own party fraction. The comrades were mostly party members approximately on the same level of de velopment, many middle party functionaries among them, none of them recognized as an outstanding leader . Every meeting ended in a fight because each comrade considered his own indi vidual interpretation of the situation to be the right party line and that of the others wrong. The situation was made even more acute by the practice of holding secret caucuses : those not invited

felt slighted and organized fractions of their own. Following the meeting with Vidal, organization began to emerge. Stamber was made political commissar, Harris military

commander, and Merriman staff officer. Harris claimed wide military experience gained with the U.S.

Army in China. A former seaman-supposedly a good field leader-he lacked experience in giving lectures. His favorite method was to pose a problem and suddenly ask somebody, without previous explanation : "What would you do in that case?" No matter what the answer was he would invariably reply in front of all the others, "You'd kill off all your men that way."

This answer had the effect of discouraging all who were se lected for company and section commanders. They would resign time and time again-especially since the men they were sup posed to lead had also heard that answer and therefore wouldn't place much confidence in their leadership. This constant changing and shifting of officers largely accounted for the fact that when the battalion had moved up to the front there were no officers and noncoms to step into the breach and take command when the need for it arose.

Merriman as staff officer received instructions from Col. Vidal to build up Harris. In order to do so Harris had to be isolated

350

from the men so they couldn't observe him closely. He was stopped from lecturing. All orders were drawn up by Merriman for Harris to sign because Harris was incompetent to draft a clean-cut order. The building up of Harris succeeded to an even greater degree than anticipated and had rather disastrous effects later on.

The men at Villa Nueva were entirely isolated from the base in Albacete. They had no trucks, received no supplies-they had to buy their food and supplies with their own money. The men became almost rebellious. They received no news even about the fighting in Spain, didn't know what was going on in the world.

Suspicion attached itself to Harris about money matters also. Harris spent money freely claiming it was his own, that he had received it from the Central Commitee of the party in New York, while there were grounds to believe he had received the money from the base for the men. [This angle of it has not yet been investigated-S.V.]

In the meantime more and more men kept on arriving. The training was at first conducted along American military lines. Later it was suggested to use a combination of French and Amer ican formations.

The plan was to train one company, send it to the front, and later build a battalion around it as more men arrived and re ceived training.

At about this time Steve Daduk joined the outfit. Daduk had been in Spain for months, had fought on three or four fronts, and been wounded a few times.

Daduk was appointed Commander of Company I, with John Scott second in command.

The relationship with the population became very good. They had much opposition and distrust to overcome. The French before them had not behaved in a manner that was expected of them. They went on drunken sprees, brawled, they even insulted

351

I

women and kept their quarters very dirty. Things had come to such a pass that when the Americans first arrived in town the populace didn't even want to show them where the barracks were located.

The Americans went about things in a systematic manner to improve this relation. They donated 6,000 pesetas to the local Socorro Raja. They showed films for the children in the morning, for the townspeople in the afternoon and for the soldiers in the evening. The battalion doctor held daily clinics treating the townspeople without fee, and the population worshiped him. They organized a fiesta for the Red Cross and ramed off an American pie that brought in 200 pesetas. Before long they suc ceeded in winning the affection of the townspeople to such a degree that they were offered the finest buildings in town for their use. The Cuban comrades played a very important role in improving the situation.

Commissar Stamber did a good job in winning over the townspeople. But this didn't hold true when it came to the bat talion. He failed to develop political leaders in the battalion the purpose for which he had been originally assigned. He was supposed to stay with the battalion only ten days but since he failed to develop leadership he had to stay on.

Around this time they decided to hold a military maneuver to demonstrate to Marty and other generals the degree of train ing they had reached. Just before the maneuver a row developed between the commanders of Company I and II, they both threat ened to arrest each other .

Despite the personal friction and other obstacles the maneuver was a success. Marty and the generals were pleased and as a reward they awarded the Americans the honor to be the first unit to occupy the model camp of the International Brigades which was to be completed in Pozo Rubio around February 10 or 12.

By this time Harris had been well built up. The men who 352

saw little of him thought him a good military commander. Col. Vidal had the idea that Harris had been picked directly by the C.C. of C.P.U.S.A. to command the Americans.

The battalion had grown to 400 men by this time. Merriman suddenly took ill. Harris rushed to his sickbed, all excited, and told him an incoherent tale of how he had overheard a fantastic plot against himself. Allegedly Royce, Morris, and other leading comrades had held a secret meeting at which they were plotting to remove Harris from command.

On February 12 the battalion received orders to move to Pozo Rubio. The same day the British division was moved to the front. Later in the same day an order came from Vidal in Albacete requesting "Captain Harris and Captain Merriman" to report to Albacete. Since at this time neither Harris nor Merriman held any rank and the usual custom was to appoint the commanders only when they were about to go to the front, Merriman and Harris immediately guessed the situation, especially since the order stated that the battalion was to move to Albacete instead

of Pozo Rubio. Merriman and Harris went to Albacete, the battalion follow

ing them. In Albacete they were informed they were going to the front. At Vidal's office Merriman and Harris were given revolvers, field glasses.

The battalion was marched to the bull ring and there equipped. The equipment was issued haphazardly. Bayonets did not fit the rifles; many pieces of vital equipment were missing altogether.

According to instructions, Harris was to act as commander and Merriman as his adjutant. Harris became extremely un nerved and excited. He told Merriman he was equally responsi ble with him for leading the battalion.

Marty and Col. Vidal made an inspection of the battalion in the bull ring. Harris became more and more unnerved-he grabbed rifles out of the men's hands saying he was a rifle in spector. It was obvious something was wrong with him and

353

the men began to murmur that Harris was drunk. Battalion Commissar Stamber in consequence ordered Harris to bed. Harris went away but came back after a while and fired his pistol off in the Guardia Nadonal, then disappeared again.

When the convoy pulled out at midnight February 15 Harris was nowhere to be found. Informed about it, Col. Vidal placed Merriman officially in command of the battalion.

The convoy was very poorly organized, the trucks broke down quite often. When they arrived at Chinchon, their destination, they couldn't find Brigade H.Q. Merriman went on to Morata where he was told by General Gall to bring up his men im mediately.

Following this order, Merriman ordered his men to take off their shirts and use them to wipe off the heavy grease on the new rifles just issued to them. Since most of the volunteers had never held a rifle in their hands before, he ordered each to fire five rounds into the bushes on the mountainside so as to have some idea about handling a rifle before going into battle.

Merriman, who had been advanced from adjutant to battalion commander, now needed an adjutant himself. He couldn't ap point one of the company commanders because that would have disturbed the leadership of the companies. Against his better judgment he had to appoint Daduk.

When they reached Morata they witnessed their first aerial fight. Our planes chased the Fascists off and brought down two planes. The men stood up well under the bombardment.

On February 17, they moved into the second line of reserve to a position on a hill later known as "Suicide Hill." It was a very steep hill encircled by a railroad on three sides, over looking both our lines and those of the Fascists, offering a clear view of the Teguna Valley.

The nights were wet, soaking the blankets-the men were drugged by lack of sleep.

354

On February 18, the Fascist planes came over and bombed the battalion again. From then on they were subjected to heavy artil lery shelling and at least one aerial bombardment daily. While in this position they witnessed the biggest air battle in Spain to that.d,ate" taking place directly above them with about 85 planes partiCIpatIng.

The Lincoln Battalion lost its first man here. Charles Edwards was killed while making observations from an outpost trench. Edwards kept shouting to the men around him: "You got to keep your head down! There is a sniper shooting at us here."

When he, too, in turn was warned to take cover, he retorted : "I am sent here to observe. F . . . you!" The next moment he was drilled through the head by a bullet.

The total strength of the battalion at that time was about 377 men. Their pay was three pesetas a day.

The men dug in on Suicide Hill, although very short of im plements. They had only 35 picks and shovels in the entire bat talion. Later they received 35 more.

As it turned out, the Americans played an important role by the mere fact of being positioned on Suicide Hill. The Lincoln Battalion acted as a reserve for the entire XV Division. At that time the situation was rather precarious. The improvised Span ish milida units had simply quit the front and the battle-weary Thaelmann and Franco-Belge brigades were becoming discour aged because they had not seen any reserves. As a matter of fact, they no longer believed in the existence of reserves-they thought that was another empty promise.

Now suddenly they beheld an entire new battalion, fresh American troops at that, decked out on the mountainside in plain view of friend and foe alike serving as reserves and they took heart anew.

The presence and example of the Americans also had a good effect on the Spanish troops. The Spanish had an aversion to

355

"f'

digging in and they said it couldn't be done there anyway be cause the ground was too rocky. Now they saw the Americans digging in on even rockier ground.

Whenever the Fascists would bomb the front line trenches the Spanish troops would usually break and run leaving the Fascists free to occupy their positions and would suffer far greater casual ties while fleeing than if they had remained in their trenches.

The Spaniards now saw the Americans stay in their trenches despite air raids, bombings, and shelling and thereby avoiding casualties. This gave them more confidence in the protection offered by entrenchment.

The presence of the Americans on Suicide Hill had its effect on the Fascists, too. They saw they couldn't attempt to break through without running into fire from both flanks.

In the six days spent on Suicide Hill the American casualties were low-two men killed and a few wounded.

On February 21, the battalion moved into the old Dimitrov position. The order was given by Lieutenant Wattis, an English man on the Brigade Staff, who told them to move in without their packs and blankets. The packs and blankets accordingly were left behind, most of them never recovered. This caused addi tional hardship in that wintry weather, leaving the men shivering in the cold, night and day.

The battalion was very poorly equipped. It lacked telephones and other necessary equipment. The battalion officers were sel dom called to meet with the brigade-most of the time they were ignorant of what the battalion was expected to do. This was one of the reasons why Lieutenant Wattis, who talked big and claimed he was doing all the planning on the XV Brigade Staff, was in a position to give orders.

On February 23, the Americans were ordered to move into the gap that existed between the lines held by the Dimitrov and the 24th Spanish battalions. According to the plan the Americans

356

were then to go into attack, with the Dimitrov and the Spanish moving up simultaneously.

The Americans moved into the gap and according to orders went into an attack, getting fairly close to the Fascist trenches. Had the other two battalions moved up also, they could have broken through the Fascist lines at Jarama. Since they failed to do so the Americans had to withdraw, losing about sixty men -twenty dead and about forty wounded.

[Previous to the Feb. 23 attack Col. Klauss, Chief of Staff of the Brigade, called in Merriman to order the Lincoln battalion to assist the German Thaelmann battalion. Just then Harris re appeared on the scene from nowhere and, taking advantage of Merriman's absence, told the comrades he had been sent to reorganize the battalion and he was taking over command. He gave orders to the battalion to move into a new position. He took the second company out personally and they wandered around in great confusion under heavy machine-gun fire. As the night

progressed Harris became delirious. He told the men he saw "50,000 Fascists ready to attack" and wanted to lead the battalion into action until Merriman learned of the situation and had him removed in an ambulance.

This incident happened around February 21 or 22 and is often referred to by the Lincoln boys as the "Moonlight Walk." De spite the heavy fire, that whole evening resulted in only one casualty.-Voros]

Daduk, Merriman's adjutant, also cracked and had to be sent to the hospital. Seacord, commander of the machine gun com pany, was then made adjutant.

On February 24> the Lincoln moved into the position formerly held by the Dimitrov. They were without food. The same day they received reinforcements-about 65 new American volunteers without any training whatsoever. These men had never handled rifles before, they had no helmets or other necessary equipment-

357

most of them had arrived only a few days before in Albacete. They were rushed to the front with orders that they be given two days' training behind the lines. These reinforcements brought the total of the battalion up to its original strength, around 400 men.

The morale of Franco-Belge and English troops was very low by that time-they had to be taken out of the lines for a day's rest.

On February 26, a Fascist prisoner revealed that the Fascist forces opposing them were very weak. The XV Brigade in con sequence decided on an attack.

The objective was to push the Fascists back behind the Jarama River. According to the plan, the 24th Spanish Battalion was to form the spearhead of the attack with the Lincoln to sup port their left flank in active defense position. After the Spanish reached the road the entire brigade was to move up. The attack was set for the 27th. The plan of operations was as follows :

9:so A.M.: Artillery barrage lasting 10 minutes. 10:00 A.M.: 24th Battalion to move up supported by tanks on

the right flank. Armored cars to be brought up behind the old Dimitrov posi tion to annihilate the Fascist machine-gun nests. The cavalry to be brought in play to evacuate the wounded and exploit the gains of the attack. Twenty airplanes to participate in the at tack, bombing and strafing the Fascist trenches.

Lieutenant Colonel Copic, Brigade Commander, was very proud of the plan and issued instructions that it be explained in detail to every man so they could see all services co-ordinated for one attack.

The Americans had not been equipped with telephone or maps. Telephone and maps were now promised to them for

the attack, also new machine guns because the ones they had were so old they could seldom keep more than three in working condition at the same time.

Daybreak found the battalion still without phone connection with the brigade. Maps arrived, but were not worth much. At 8 :so A.M. The Brigade telephone men reported they hadn't enough wire to make connections.

The artillery opened up as per schedule but their shells fell in front of the English reserve positions instead of the Spanish or Lincoln battalions where the attack was scheduled.

Lieutenant Colonel Klauss sent orders to the Lincoln not to leave the trenches till the Spanish battalion advanced at least So meters.

No airplanes were in sight. Two armored cars showed up in the rear but refused to participate in the attack.

The Spanish went over the top on schedule, advanced about IS meters under very heavy fire, then withdrew to the trenches, refusing to advance further without artillery or tank support.

Klauss then gave orders for the Americans to attack to en courage the Spanish to advance again.

The first American company on the right flank went over the top. The second company was also ordered over by Klauss. In the middle of the attack the Brigade informed the battalion that the reason the planes did not come was that the battalion had failed to put out an airplane signal. The battalion had never heard of an airplane signal until then nor did it know what it was. Once that was explained, the men hurriedly made a T signal out of their shirts and put it out with the leg of the T pointing to the enemy. Comrade Streysand was killed while lay

ing out this signal. When the phone connection was finally established Brigade

Commander Copic claimed that the Spanish had already ad vanced 700 meters and they were being killed off because the

359

358

Lincoln battalion had failed to support them. When Merriman informed him about the true state of affairs Copic angrily inter- rupted him.

"Don't contradict me," he yelled, and added that the Ameri- cans had disgraced the Brigade, they had spoiled the advance by their failure to attack. Although informed of the high concen tration of machine gun fire on the Lincoln he gave Merriman ten minutes to make up that 700 meter advance.

Following that conversation three planes arrived out of 20 promised. The planes flew over the Fascists and left after a single sortie.

Signaling with his arm to the men to go over the top, Merri- man was hit in the left shoulder by a bullet that broke the bone in five places. Seacord, the battalion adjutant, having been killed, Merriman turned over command to Phil Cooperman, the Battalion Clerk, and though wounded, talked personally with the Franco-Belge and English to take over the trench before permit ting himself to be carried off. He ordered his reluctant stretcher bearers to take him to Brigade Headquarters to speak with Copic. When he arrived Copic stated Merriman was too weak to be allowed to speak and refused to hear him.

On February 27 a number of mistakes were made. Usually an attack is called off when certain key conditions don't materialize. The services did not participate in the attack in the co-ordinated manner as planned. It was also a mistake to inform the men in detail what support to expect in the attack because when the promised support failed to materialize they became reluctant to advance.

The Americans were insufficiently trained. They either went over the top in groups, not singly in face of the heavy machine gun fire, or refused to go over at all and had to be forced to do so at pistol point by Lieutenant Wattis, Brigade Staff Officer, who even tried to force the machine gunners to go over the top. [This is when the Lincoln "mutinied."-S. V.]

360

Stamber, Political Commissar, was nowhere to be seen dur ing the attack. After the attack on the 23rd, Stamber suddenly discovered that there were a lot of improvements to be made in the cookhouse behind the lines and accordingly stayed there.

The Fascists showed their weakness in not counterattacking after the February 23 attack. Our attack on the 27th was the first counterattack against the Fascist drive to cut the Madrid Valencia road.

The attack on the 27th had a strong positive feature. When the Fascists saw so many new troops advance on such a narrow front they became scared of the unexpectedly strong forces op posing them. They eased their pressure and stopped their ad vance. The Madrid-Valencia road was saved.

S. V.

50

362

fa fa fa

killed in battle, actually prohibited news of their death from being sent out to them from Spain. The party preferred to pro long their agony in order to squeeze the last ounce of energy and monetary assistance out of them, lest their grief make them unwilling to contribute further support. Let me quote here at random from one of the hundreds of letters from home marked "Dead," that 1 found moldering in a trash can in the American Base Commissariat. One of the comrades who worked as a censor tipped me off to their existence, first swearing me to absolute secrecy. It was dated March 18, 1937, and addressed to Walt Durham, Socorro Raja, Room 17-1, Albacete, Spain. (I have changed the name-why break open old wounds?)

Darling- Today is a month since I heard from you, a month of watching

the mail box. The only thing that cheers me up a little is when I read in our paper-of the many victories of the Loyalists. Then I forget myself and my own heartache and consider the wonderful thing you are doing, and all the fighters of democracy, to ease the heartache of the whole world and make it a better place. Sweetness, although I get no mail from you I will continue to write every Thursday and Sunday as I have been doing. I know you are writing if you are able and I have the utmost faith that through all these hard times and lonely days you will someday soon come back to me and we will take up our life together, but it will be a thousand times sweeter than before.

Darling, tonight at our meeting the comrades all asked that I convey to you their love and good wishes. Charlie, who had stayed away all this time came tonight and promised to come to the next meeting. We are right on the job with leaflets every week and good leaflets too. Our unit is also collecting a lot of money for Spain, also food and clothing.

Darling, otherwise there is no news . . . On the outside my life is the same as before except that I feel more responsibility toward my party work. I am trying to take your place as much as I can. But sweetheart in my heart there is a steady longing that does not leave me for a minute. That longing for you, for your sweetness. Darling,

363

on the conservative side. For the appalling fact is that no one in the Communist Party in the United States or in Spain both ered to keep a record of the names of the first volunteers sent to Spain. The Party was paid by the head, it received its cut from the World Tourists travel agency on the transportation of every volunteer shipped; its interest was in the amount of that total take. The identity of the individuals was a matter of total indif

The volunteers who arrived daily in small groups did not

outside of those in their own narrow circle. My effort to compile

than one out of every two American volunteers who participated in the Jarama battles had been killed right in those early days, and many of the remaining survivors lost their lives in the bat tles of Brunete before 1 was able to reach them. Thus the list

rti MERRIMAN, who was wounded early on February 27, did not know the real extent of the casualties suffered by his battalion. As 1 was able to piece it together later, out of a total number of 377 effectives on the battalion list, 153 had been killed on that day alone. That was the day the Lincoln mutinied and demanded to be withdrawn. About the casualties, if 1 err it is

ference to the party. know each other well, couldn't tell who was missing in battle the actual list was made even more difficult by the fact that more

will never be accurately completed. There is more to this story. If failing to keep a list of the volun

teers sent overseas were not bad enough, the Party, instead of notifying the wives, parents, or other close relatives of men

Your comrade and wife Olga.

the party did with the cash contributions amounting to millions of dollars.

The extent of this infamy is best illuminated by another in cident. During the time of the Aragon Fascist offensive in the spring of 1938, when newspapers in the United States were full of the debacle of the Spanish Loyalist Army, in the period when Herbert Matthews, known for his sympathies for the Loyalists, reported in the New York Times that the International Brigades

had been cut to ribbons and only about 150 Americans had man aged to escape with their lives, all through those agonizing weeks and for nearly two months thereafter the letters sent by the sur viving volunteers in Spain had failed to reach their families in the United States. The letters the comrades were receiving from home were frantic with fear and despair, begging for at least a line of assurance that their beloved son, husband, or father was alive, even if crippled and in the hospital. We were so disturbed by the avalanche of those tearful letters that we organized a "write a letter home" campaign in the XV Brigade, assigning not only my staff but demanding of all commissars to see to it that every

surviving volunteer actually wrote at least one letter home. Yet the pleas from back home kept arriving, ever more desperate, ever more frantic. I went up to Barcelona to investigate. All those letters had left Spain for France as usual.

Finally the truth came out-those letters had been left piling up for months in the Paris office of the American Communist Party, instead of being mailed to America by affixing French postage stamps on them. The explanation? Some comrade in the office had absconded with the stamp money. When I raised hell, why hadn't the party immediately provided other money, I was

told the party was short of funds! Collections in the U.S. were at their peak then and were even further stimulated by the news of the debacle-yet the party at home found better use for that money than to lay out another hundred dollars or so for stamps for the surviving volunteers in Spain.

P.S. Love from your two sons.

Comrade Durham had been dead for a month by then but his grieving wife and comrade was calculatingly kept in igno rance by her comrades in leadership of the party. They did not want her to know that she was a widow and her two sons hal orphaned. They let her continue to pen tear-soaked letters twice a week in despondent hope, without even affording her the con solation of the certainty which, heartrending as it may be, affords an anchor for the distraught mind and permits the healing proc ess to begin. Let her be tormented by gnawing uncertainty and despair, the facts that really counted were that Charlie was com ing back to the meetings and that the unit was raising even more money for "Spanish Aid," which, of course, went into the party kitty.

Less than a cent out of every dollar, not a full one per cent of the monies collected for Spanish Aid, had been turned over by the party for that purpose.

Pressed hard at a subsequent congressional investigation to account for the expenditure of these funds, the party, with its usual lying ingenuity, first denied having received anything but a small, insignificant sum, then claimed that it had actually de voted seventeen per cent to the purpose for which it was raised. Then came the joker. The party did not dare to assert that even this small percentage had been expended in cash. This seventeen per cent had been computed as the alleged value of the used cloth ing sent to Spain-an allegation which in no way explained what

364

:1

,! I

i, I I

'I

I,

T

I

I

II hold on to your few letters and read them over and over, also.all the old letters. I carry them with me to work every day and darhg your presence has never left my mind. Darling I will close now WIth my best and sincerest wishes to all your brave comrades and to you the same plus all my love and a million kisses. Darling I wait hopefully for a letter. . . .

II

;1\

I had made many excuses for the party before that incident and also later. After all, I and the rest of the comrades put to gether constituted the party. Some of us would. casionally .try to separate ourselves from certain acts and polIcIes by blammg it on the "party leadership." Yet we were all part of that leader

ship even though the higher-ups had all the say and the lower downs none.

This is why I don't know yet whom to blame for letting those frantically awaited letters from the battlefields lie there for months because of those niggardly few dollars. I only know

what I said when the comrade from Paris tried to justify that act, protesting and proving to me he wasn't responsible fo it. "I believe you, comrade, individually you are not responsIble.

But collectively, every single son of a bitch of us is."

51

"1By late fall I had gathered much information on the early history of American participation in the Spanish Civil War. I had been to every front, tracked down every detached unit, made a survey of every American medical installation, and it was time I saw some action, too-no longer as a visiting ob server but as an active participant. I put in for a transfer to the XV Brigade, having discussed it with Major Merriman, Chief of Staff of the XV Brigade, and Dave Doran, Brigade Commis sar, both of whom favored the idea.

Fiala, however, claimed that the Historical Commission needed me and refused to release me. I finally won his consent by ap pointing Paul Wendorff, on my own authority, as my assistant in Albacete, and by agreeing to remain fully responsible politi cally for my post on the Historical Commission even while with the Brigade. Paul Wendorff was a history major from New York who had served with distinction as a machine gunner with the Lincoln battalion. He was an excellent man for the position and being somewhat battle-fatigued was grateful for the appointment.

As soon as I reported to the Brigade, Doran sent me to Madrid to assist Captain Frank Ryan with a souvenir book of the his tory of the XV Brigade which had been promised to the men in time to be sent home for Christmas presents and which was long overdue. My job was to complete that book and expedite its publication.

Captain Ryan's office and living quarters were at the political

367

headquarters of Andre Marty which occupied the palatial home of the Duke of Velasquez, and I moved right in with him. I mention this because it afforded me the opportunity to meet informally many of the highest figures in the international Com munist movement who usually stopped there on their way to or from Moscow. They seemed to be a rather special breed, or per haps products of the same mold patterned in Moscow, highly in telligent and razor-sharp in discussion, yet very vain and strik ingly egotistic even when in their cups. Their professed con cern for the downtrodden masses definitely excluded any sym pathy or responsibility for the fate of the individual-they all made fun of my "vestiges of bourgeois American sentimentality clearly reflecting the political immaturity of the infantile Ameri can Party."

Frank Ryan was unmistakably Irish in the proud way he car ried his bushy gray-haired head, from his ruddy face and large hooked nose, and his six-foot-and-some robust figure. He had been a member of the Irish Republican Army, had served a jail sentence in Ireland for terrorist activities, had participated in the early fighting in defense of Madrid, and he was more than half deaf from concussion in a shell explosion. He gave me a rousing welcome and took me out "to wet our gills" before we got to work.

What kept him bogged down was the long list of American officers and commissars he had received from Doran and whom he was to "play up" in the book. That list was broken down into categories I, II, and III, indicating the prominence each man on the list was to receive. In addition, he had been given a simi lar list by the British, and naturally he had a preferred list of his own on the Irish. His problem was how to glorify all those selected elite and still find space for some sort of history of the Brigade that would include at least some reference to the run-of the-mill volunteers without whom the Brigade would have had no history at all. I had no stomach for that sort of work but 368

luckily it was not my baby and that harassed wonderful Irish fighter had my sympathy.

.I sat down and contributed the missing chapters on the actual

hIstory of the Brigade and also worked out a sort of running

narrative to tie all the "press agent stuff" together, which com

pleted the book. (On the whole it was a sorry job but the com

f

rades in the Brigade-particularly those whose name or picture

or both appared in it, liked it.) After checking arrangements .

wIh the pnnter, I convinced Ryan that he had seen enough actlO already and it was my turn now; he was to stay in Madnd and see the book through the printshop while I was to return to the Brigade, which was then fighting around Teruel.

. I neve: saw Frank Ryan again. He was captured by the Fas CIsts dunng the Aragon retreat while trying to rejoin the Brigade and had been sentenced to death. He languished in Franco's jail for years, because the Irish Republic for whose independence he had fought, would not lift a finger to free him. It was the hated

imperialist British government which finally interfered to save the life of this Irish rebel and ultimately secured his release.

rarara

him enthusiastically but his response was considerably more re strained. He was a prematurely bald, undersized man in his late twenties who had practically been raised in the party. He had held leading positions since his teens but his political future in the party was already behind him. He was highly intelligent but self-indulgent and vindictive, known for his intrigues and readi ness to stick his political knife in the back of any of his asso ciates at the opportune moment.

I knew from Laurence that Gordon had got himself in the dog house here in Spain also, first because of his intrigues against the leadership in the training camp, secondly by having asked to be sent home because of an alleged chronic stomach ailment which the doctors could neither localize nor discover.

As we exchanged information about the Ohio comrades I de tected a bitter streak of jealousy in his comments. Frank Rogers was commissar of the Mac-Pap battalion, John Gates was then acting base commissar in Albacete in place of Laurence who had gone back home, Jack Cooper was a captain and commander of the brigade machine gun company-excellent backgrounds for all of them for a future career in the party back home, while Gordon's accomplishments were, if anything, on the negative side. I sensed he was somewhat jealous even of me although it was well known in Ohio and in the movement in general that I had no political ambitions whatever and was not in rivalry with anyone. While we talked Gordon belched contin uously which I found disconcerting. He blamed it on his bad stomach saying he wouldn't want to discuss that, he preferred to suffer with it rather than be mistaken for a malingerer. I had my reservations about that; I noticed that he was swallowing air regularly and then belching it up, presumably to back up his claim of stomach trouble.

Gordon was on the staff of the commissariat. His job was preparing speakers' outlines on current events for political dis cussions in the brigade. He guessed I would be assigned to the

huts, chewing on rock-hard chunks of granite-gray Spanish bread

Outside I bumped into Dave Gordon, a former leading mem

370

371

52 ra HAVE you ever been alone? Alone for nearly three weeks, in midwinter, groping from

one desolate mountain to another in heavy snow until your very thoughts seemed to have congealed; sleeping in abandoned stone

with aching jaws blue with cold? That's what it took to catch up with the brigade which was on the move from Teruel.

The commissariat was quartered in a couple of huts near the brigade command post but Doran was away at a meeting with the XXXV Division to which our brigade belonged. Comrade Robert Cooney, chief of the commissariat, was a ruddy, round faced young Scotsman-he did not know what assignment Doran had in mind for me but told me I could spend the night there and report to Doran next morning. I threw my musette into a corner and went outside. That musette contained all my chattels and worldly goods-an extra pair of wool hose, a num ber of notebooks, a few packs of cigarettes, a battered old can that served both as soup bowl and drinking cup, an aluminum spoon, a canteen, and two clips of ammunition for my pistol. Not much of a fortune for a man past thirty-seven but enough for my kind of party functionary-we were the 20th century red monks who had renounced wealth for the Hammer and Sickle, to spread the gospel of Marx and Lenin and the glory and the kingdom of the proletariat.

ber of the Ohio Bureau whom I had known for years. I greeted

brigade's daily mimeographed news bulletin and he seemed re lieved when he heard I had no intention of joining the staff of the commissariat, that I wanted a military assignment.

The next morning I reported to Doran at the brigade com mand post. Compared to his last appearance he was now smartly dressed in a tailored military uniform. We had met only a few times previously and although he had been friendly and courteous we had not established any personal relationship. He was a humorless dead-end kid grown into manhood during the extreme privations of the depression, leading the hobolike existence of the penniless Young Communist League organizer around the mining regions of Pittsburgh. He was about twenty nine, elevated to his present post by a chain of fortuitous events. Arriving in Spain just before our Brunete offensive and as signed to the Brigade Commissariat as assistant to Steve Nelson, the Brigade Commissar, Doran happened to come across a propaganda truck equipped with a loudspeaker just when the assault on Belchite reached its critical stage. With quick presence of mind Doran brought the truck up and talked a pocket of resisting Fascist troops into surrender. A few days later, when Nelson was wounded, Doran became acting Brigade Com missar. After Nelson was sent back home the Party decided that inasmuch as most volunteers in the brigade were young and members of the Young Communist League, the post of brigade commissar in the future should be held by a member of the Young Communist League, and since Doran was already acting commissar, the post went to him.

As it happened, in Doran's case this worked out fine; he took to military life like a duck to water. Brigade Commander Lieutenant Colonel Vladimir Copic, himself a former com missar, was an old-time Yugoslav Communist well versed in the rules of playing the party game-grab all the credit but make sure to have someone on hand to blame when things

backfired. Dave was a fighting man by instinct and he was happy to devote his time to military matters. Lieutenant Colonel Copie was eager to encourage that trait; he wasn't much of an organizer and two heads were better than one. Dave did most of Copic's military work which left Copic time to build up his political fences with the Russian military advisers and other higher-ups in the LB. Doran was a strong disciplinarian and did not hesitate to employ measures from which Copic would shrink. Capic was essentially a very vain person, a one-time

aspiring opera singer; he demanded applause and much of it. Dave had no such limitations to curb his drive-he was the more determined military man of the two.

Doran eyed me steadily while I explained why the brigade book was late. I blamed it all on the paper shortage. He charged I had violated his orders, I should have stayed in Madrid until the book was finished. I refused to be thrown off balance, I told him I had stayed until we ran out of paper. Captain Ryan was there, no purpose would have been served by both of us idling away our time in Madrid. I wanted to be with the

brigade where I could be of more use. Dave now switched to a conversational tone, asked me what

I thought of Bill Laurence, and a number of other leading comrades in Spain-the regular double-edged party trick to size up where a man stood and perchance obtain some derogatory information on one's rivals. I spoke well of Laurence and of all the rest, which seemed to satisfy him. He then informed me that Johnny Gates had also transferred to the brigade, he

had come up last night, what was my opinion of him? I spoke of Gates highly and said Gates had an air of modesty about him that had a good effect on the men. Doran was very much interested when I related how I had located Gates at the Cordoba front, how well his Brigade Commander and his Brigade Commissar spoke of him. I must have given a higher

373

7

T

opinion of Gates than Doran apparently would have preferred they were both of the Y.C.L., hence potential rivals-because Doran quickly retorted that popularity with the men was not necessarily a desirable trait in a commissar, that he personally wasn't interested in winning popularity contests but in build ing the XV Brigade into the best fighting unit in the LB. He then rose abruptly before I could ask about my assignment and told me to go down to the brigade ammo dump, pack a mule, and take a load of munitions up to the Mac-Paps who were

under attack. The ammo depot was not very busy. The mule then being

,

loaded with cases of rifle and machine gun bullets was for some one else who, to my surprise, turned out to be Johnny Gates. He waved and was on his way before they even started loading my mule.

. The front line was about five miles away on a mountam top

with only a single trail leading to it. At first I had difficulties with my mule. He was poorly loaded and I had to readjust the cases that shifted. Then the mule became balky. I goaded him in English, then in Spanish, but without result. Finally in ex asperation I cursed him in Hungarian. For some inexplicable reason that struck a responsive chord in him, he pricked up his ears and got going. I wondered what ancestral memories those

Hungarian curses had awakened in him; one of his remote progenitors must have accompanied the Huns, Tartars, or Turks on their invasions of Hungary.

The Fascists, who had been taken by surprise by our night attack, rallied by the time I was halfway up and opened up with artillery. They started shelling the trail and as each shell screamed in I instinctively ducked or flung myself to the ground. This was not the first time by any means that I was under fire in Spain, but on those other occasions I had exposed myself to it voluntarily. Those other times I had been a visitor to the fronts, always knowing in the back of my mind that I could

374

The atmosphere was tense. Our night golpe de mano (a sur prise attack, literally "strike with the fist") had caught the Fascists by surprise. The battalion took the Fascist trenches with but few casualties and then braced itself for the inevitable counterattack. The morning had been comparatively quiet. The Fascist command, preparing for its spring offensive, had not

anticipated any Loyalist attacks, particularly in that quiet sector. They needed time to react. But their reconnaissance planes had been busy since daybreak and by noon they had already managed

375

withdraw at will. This was different. Now I was under orders and had to walk into it. I was now afraid and reluctant to move I had to force myself to get to my feet. Luckily the range wasn't too accurate, the closest explosion missed me by about twenty yards, and by figuring percentages I soon persuaded myself to ignore the shelling and pretend unconcern. I steeled myself not to duck when I heard a shell overhead and soon learned to distinguish between the near ones and those passing over. The

seemed dead. We discovered Major Cecil E. Smith, a former Canadian Army

talion Commissar, with a small group of officers standing under an olive tree. We headed there with our mules. They started shouting to us to stop and get the hell under some other tree. The battalion Command Post was being shelled and we were under direct observation. We tied our mules to an olive tree and

trouble with the mule also helped. The mule, not being a reason ing animal and ignorant of percentages, stupidly refused to ad vance into danger. He tried to bolt and drag me back every time he heard a shell-it took all my physical strength to pull him forward. I caught up with Johnny Gates and we made our way together to the Mac-Pap battalion command post. On the way we encountered stretcher-bearers evacuating shellfire casual ties. They were young boys rather badly mangled, one of them

sergeant now Battalion Commander, and Frank Rogers, Bat

crossed to the battalion staff.

to move in sufficient artillery to subject us to heavy fire. Fascist bomber and fighter planes were due any moment, for the Fascists were observed getting ready for a counterattack.

Frank Rogers whom I hadn't seen for months wanted to know what the hell I was doing, picking that time for a visit. When I proudly informed him that I had finally managed to transfer to the Brigade and had just brought up some ammuni tion, he wanted to know who in hell asked me to do that, they had plenty of ammo, the battalion had its ammo supply well organized. I told him those were Doran's orders. This made him frown and he told me in a quiet aside : "Doran is testing you and

is doing the same with Gates. The bastard ought to know better, you've both been around."

That thought had not occurred to me and I did not like it. I was happy to take that ammo up feeling I was contributing to the actual fighting right from the start; this made me feel like a foolish schoolboy. I told Frank I would like to transfer to his battalion. He said they sure could use me and that he would discuss it with Major Smith.

On the way back the Fascist planes became more numerous. I noticed more and more formations coming up from all direc tions, mostly fighting planes concentrating for an attack. They struck just as I was leaving the trail for the highway to Segura de los Banos.

The Fascist planes came in fast and low, lower than I had even seen them, the air throbbed and the ground vibrated with the roar of their motors. I watched them with rising tension, still the visiting observer but nonparticipant, when I saw the first bombs fall. They exploded sufficiently far from me not to make me too apprehensive although the concussion set my ears ringing and I had to open my mouth to equalize the pres

sure. Then came the strafing and I was no longer a bystander. Planes with their machine guns wide open came swooping down

376

the road. I yanked the halter frantically but the mule stood braced with its four legs wide apart. I let go and dove down the embankment as plane after plane with hurricane force swept by so low that their propellers almost sucked me up, the ta-ta-ta of their machine guns approaching like ugly ogres in hundred league boots rattling iron sticks on a giant fence. When the planes were gone, I climbed up the embankment. The mule was on his side, dead, his belly ripped wide open, his eyes glazed; the steam from the big mound of excrement at the base of his tail was mingling with the steam from his entrails. I felt very sorry for the mule but had no time for contemplation, another large formation of planes was coming up. I rushed down the embankment, ran across the barranco, and dove into a stone hut on the other side just as the bombs began dropping.

The hut shook, loosing clouds of dirt and dust from the rafters and stirring up the dry straw on the floor. I was choking and rolled under the stone trough, rising and falling with the trembling ground while titanic smoking fists beat down out side. The immediate strafing that followed was somewhat of a relief; by contrast the hardest part was over. As soon as my eyes cleared a bit I ran out. The air was hazy with smoke and dust and I heard screams. I ran toward the sound and saw other dim figures rise and run in the same direction. The screams seemed to come from a large smoking crater and a number of men, all Spaniards, were running around yelling in panic, not seeming to know what to do. I rallied a couple of them, shouted to the others to come around, and set them digging with their bare hands.

We had just got the first man out, he was limp with no visible wounds but he seemed dead, when a major came running down the hill yelling at the top of his lungs in half-German, half-Spanish that the division observation post in the church tower had been hit trapping General Walter, the Division Com-

377

mander, inside. He wanted us to go back with him. The men . hesitated and looked at me. I told them to go on digging, and directed the major down the road to get other help. I had met Walter a few times; he was a general with a large staff and I knew that in a minute or two he would have all the help he needed and then some, while if we left, the men here would surely die, no one would hurry back here to get them out. The German major demanded my name and I told him Juan Gomez; the dust and smoke was too thick for him to recognize me later. He left cursing and on the run. Later I learned I had been right in my decision. We rescued five men. General Walter's post had not collapsed, he had suffered no damage outside a few

minor scratches. When I finally returned to the Commissariat I found a bit of

excitement. The hut in which I had slept the night before had been hit by a shell. I found my musette intact under the debris and recovered it; it was good to see that faithful companion again.

That evening I went back to Dave Doran about my assign ment. I asked for a military post and told him about my military background. Dave did not see it my way. He explained that the Brigade had changed considerably since the early days in Jarama. The days of battle-green officers, untrained commissars and men were long past. Most of the officers were graduates of the I.B. Officers' Training Schools, the others had gained their experience in the field; in short, the Brigade had developed its military leaders out of its own ranks. I had not undergone any basic training, I was too old for a rifleman and had no field ex perience in command. He had other plans for me. The British . needed a battalion commissar and had asked for Bob Cooney but he had no one capable of taking Cooney's place until Gates and I came up. Gates was younger; he was sending him to the Lincoln to assist the battalion commissar. He wanted me to

replace Cooney as Chief of the Brigade Commissariat. The Com missariat needed reorganization badly and also to be turned into an efficient political staff. He was too busy with military work; he needed an assistant who knew how to act on his own with out running to him for a decision every time something came up.

I resented being considered old, although I had to admit my heart did no longer take kindly to the mountainous terrain. I asked him just what exactly was the function of the Chief of the Commissariat? Doran answered that it was something like the Organizational Secretary to the District Organizer, to work closely with the Brigade Commissar and see that the political directives were implemented and carried out throughout the Brigade. It was a position parallel to the Chief of Staff to the Brigade. When I asked for particulars, exactly what I and the commissariat were expected to do, he told me to talk it over with Bob Cooney, work out a plan and program on the basis of our talk, and report back to him the next day. I still wasn't keen on it and asked him how about assigning me to the ob servers or military intelligence but he cut me short; it was a decision and those were his orders. He was curt and formal about that-he made me know that was where informal dis cussions ended and official relationships began.

Cooney's dour face lit up at the news. It was obvious he was eager to get away, he must have disliked working with Doran very much. I had a difficult time keeping him with me long enough to give me a few pointers. He must have approved of my approach in his fashion, for later, when I was with the British battalion during our Ebro counteroffensive, he was about as friendly to me as the British were capable of being to any American.

The next morning I typed out a proposed departmentaliza tion and a program of work for the Commissariat. My party experiences came in handy.

378

I found Dave free, lolling in the forenoon sun on the hillside in front of the Brigade Command dugout, and took my plan . to him. I read it to him and we discussed it point by point, Dave generally approving, making suggestions here and there. We were about a third finished when the Fascists began sporadically shelling us and a shell landed on our hillside less than a hundred feet away. Naturally I looked up and found Dave affecting unconcern, his eyes fixed on me. I took the cue, if the sonofa bitch was still testing me, I could play it as well as he. I read on placidly even though the shelling became more regular, they were 75-mms. and came in at about two-minute intervals, ex ploding at random. I would look up after every sentence await ing his comments but as the shelling continued his comments gradually ceased and I saw him getting tauter, watching me with

eyes narrowed to a slit. He wanted me to make the first move but I wouldn't oblige. The shells now landed in more rapid succession, I guessed two batteries were firing. There was no sense to this idiotic game but he had called it, it was up to him to halt it. I kept reading on when a shell struck one of our observation posts about thirty feet away. I saw men running toward the struck post but I went on reading. Dave now rose abruptly and said my plan was fine, he was in full agreement, I had full authority to go ahead, and stalked into the dugout. I stood there in seeming unconcern until I saw him disappear and then took to my heels, running as fast as I could until I

found a hollow to dive into. When the shelling ceased I went back to the commissariat.

The first man I bumped into was Dave Gordon who con gratulated me. I didn't know what for and he told me he had heard I was going to be appointed Chief of the Brigade Com missariat; the comrades in Ohio would be proud of me.

I was a long way from Ohio and was proud of nothing. The games Doran seemed to like to play were too sadistic for my

380

liking. I walked away from Gordon and without being aware of it I found myself humming a song I had picked up from the seamen in the Almansa battery, those "bad elements" the battery commissar was forever trying to suppress.

We're a bunch of bastards, Bastards are we;

We'd rather f . . . than fight For Liber-teee!

Aye, Brother, aye, and up your arsel

T

T

53

rarara

volunteered. He learned to read and write in the brigade-the result of our campaign to wipe out the high degree of illiteracy among our Spaniards. He has a beautiful lyric tenor voice and great nobility of bearing-born in the United States or in Italy he would have become a famous opera singer. As his gold-spun voice rises in song after song, the Spaniards draw closer and closer ; it takes them back home to their beloved ; some are silently crying. I am also caught in the mood but this is not what I have originally intended. I whisper to Julio: "Era una noche . . ." I have heard him sing that one before, it starts out as melancholy as only a Spanish folksong could, but the ending is explosive. Julio winks and begins.

It was one of those beautiful nights In the balmy Spring scented with flowers; The sky sprinkled with stars sparkling brilliant Over the silvery sea. I was strolling along the shore Listening with aching heart to the soft murmur Of the gently lapping waves when I heard The plaintive lament behind a dune:

"Don't you squeeze my breast, you bum-let go my tid"

That breaks the spell. The new recruits are clapping and bellowing, repeating that chorus over and over. Others come forward with their favorite songs and we are all merry, singing far into the night. The young recruits are no longer strangers and alone, they have been fused into one group of comrades. The songfest goes on and on and I float off into sleep.

After days of riding and choking with dust in the bouncing Russian-made open Ford trucks we set out on foot to take up new positions. We're well equipped and full of the spirit of offensive. We start out late in the afternoon, the sun is still shining but its heat is gone, her rays bathe the wild mountain

383

TRANQUlLIZERS-TAKE ONE TO FOUR

After a spell of bad weather the sun is out; it reflects blind ingly from the snow. I am on a mountaintop, exulting in the warmth. I spread my poncho on the snow and start undressing slowly, peeling off layer after layer of clothes that haven't been off my body in weeks. Finally I stand stark naked amid all that snow soaking up the sun, methodically searching the seams for lice and snapping those ugly gray bodies, sluggish with my blood, between my thumbnails. It's wonderful to be alive. The supply of lice is limitless and as I crack them endlessly one after the

other, I gradually fall asleep.

We are resting between actions, slowly recovering from the crippling blows. New reinforcements have come in, mostly Spanish and Catalan. We are camping in the open in a valley under the beautiful Spanish night sky. The new recruits are apprehensive and homesick, they converse in whispers. I call Julio over and ask him to sing. He is one of those Spanish volunteers in whose development we take great pride. He is a village cobbler, father of four children, an analfabete before he

382

Ra WHEN sleep doesn't come some people count sheep, others resort to sleeping pills. I have an inexhaustible supply of the latter, I brought them back from Spain. I possess a large variety of them but I don't take them orally-they float into my consciousness on their own volition. Here are a few samples:

T

scenery in a friendly welcoming smile. The unpaved serpentine road winds gently up the mountainside and we march in an endless line, happy and gay, exulting in our strength. The road climbs steeper and steeper and conversation dies out; breath comes laboring and soon the heart pounds. The sun has long set yet we march on, plodding far into the night, dragging grimly up one mountain, stumbling down another, on and on: lift one foot, pick up the other, this foot here and now the other, the other, the other . . . until it wearily blurs out in sleep.

111

From Barcelona to Madrid is a long distance-it takes a day by truck. The road leads through some of the most breathtaking mountain scenery in Spain and I dread every foot of it. I know it is fear, nerve-wracking fear that I find impossible to mask worse than any battle. Fear in battle comes and goes in spurts, relief follows tension. Here tension is constant and increases with every twist and turn of the narrow road as it winds its way along the precipice. Some of the curves are so sharp that the truck has to back and fill with half of its body over the abyss, misjudgment by an inch would spell the end. I travel these roads often. The Spanish chauffeur is grinning over my funk and as he reaches the mountaintop he cuts the ignition and coasts down with ever-increasing speed, avoiding going over by a hair at each turn, proud of how much gas he saves that day. It doesn't bother him that these mountain gorges are dotted with trucks and cars that have missed, that we are losing more trucks and cars to these mountains than to Fascist aviation. I squeeze down on the floorboard until I am half lifted out of my seat, hold my breath till my lungs are ready to burst, and relief comes only when the Fascist planes come into sight. The chauffeur the brakes frantically and dives into a ditch. It is his turn now to show fear and he can't figure this crazy Americano who has been so scared when sitting safely in the cab and who now stands on the roadside watching the planes without taking

384

shelter. He yells to me to join him and when I refuse to take shelter, he makes circles around his ear with his little finger:

SEDATIVES

It is a beautiful spring morning, sunny but not hot, early March, 1938. We're in defensive position in Belchite have moved

in late last night. The Commissariat is set up in yrd fenced in by a thick stone wall. An almost straight, wide



Ighway leads to the lines about five miles ahead but oddly there IS no traffic on it. There is unusual plane activity, greater than any of us has seen before, the sky is never clear for a moment of Fascist planes. We have no planes of our own at all. It is still very .early in th: moring and the front is quiet, apparently the antICIpated FaSCIst spnng offensive has again been delayed. The planes are all over the sky, flying high in individual forma tions of three, each formation sweeping over and over its own patch of sky. I am still very tired, I have had only two hours of sleep. I stretch and yawn while considering what I should do

,4 I



first. I decide to wait until the truck returns and then drive up to the Brigade Command Post; I have lent the truck to Lieu tenant Biegelman of the observers and it still hasn't come back.

i



!

I am wa .

ting fo some other car or truck to come along on 

whIch to hItch a nde but no vehicles are on the road, which is rather strange. Two other International Brigades besides ours are i.n the line and there should be a steady stream of supplies movmg up to them. A disheveled staff major from the division arrives on foot asking if I can lend him transportation, he has lost his fifth car that morning on his way up from Army Corps. The major doesn't know what's going on, no vehicles seem to get anywhere this morning, the Fascist planes pounce on any-

385

large court

((La t'

l "("H

c' es a muy c: aro. e's crazy, for sure.")

I nde those trucks on and on, veering around those turns with demoniac speed, squeezing my eyelids tight when the truck sways until I doze off fitfully. . . .

thing that moves on the roads and bomb and strafe it out of commission. Every road he has traveled is dotted with destroyed transport. "I can't figure it out," he laments over and over, still unnerved by his narrow escapes.

I'm no longer eager for a ride. I strike out on foot, cutting across the newly plowed field, deciding to drop in on the Brigade Medical Post on the way to see if they are all right before reporting to the Brigade Command Post. The furrows are deep, it is rough going, the reflection of the sun on the dried-out lime-white ground is beginning to make my eyes smart. I pause to rest, scanning the planes circling high; the field is flat and my eyes can travel for miles. A formation of three planes keeps circling high overhead but it never occurs to me to take cover. I even speculate on why it is so difficult to convince our men,

particularly the newer recruits, that they don't have to freeze to the ground the minute a plane appears, that just because they can see a plane anywhere in the sky doesn't prove the plane can also see everyone on the ground.

The planes are moving away. I resume my trek. Suddenly the lead plane peels off, makes a turn, and plunges into a screaming dive coming right at me. That's impossible, a plane won't attack a single man, I reject the concept, while flinging myself to the ground, burrowing my head into a furrow, pressing my body into the earth. The rapid tattoo of the strafing machine gun swells into a furious crescendo, the bullets advance, hop skipping to me from the rear. Each strike is louder as it rushes up, four . . . three . . . two . . . SKIP! I will it desperately, my body tensed like a bow. The bullet skips and strikes ahead, and further ahead and ahead, and it is fading away now. My pent-up breath leaves me, I sit up and there comes that second plane and the third with their machine guns wide open, and then again, then two go away and one comes back dropping small personal bombs, they sound like mortars, they explode offside; outlined in my black poncho on that gray-white field I am a perfect 386

target, and those planes make two more strafing runs on me all alone in that field, in my black poncho, before they finally leave me. Joe Dallet's black poncho outlines me starkly, and as the machine gun bullets strike closer and closer I arch and make them skip and skip and skip until they are past and hop away, fading out, fading out, and I am fading into sleep.

We are marching again all night, troops of all units disorgan ized and intermixed. This is not an orderly withdrawal but a near rout, Belchite is lost. It took us almost two weeks of fight ing to capture Belchite in the Brunete offensive last year; the Fascists with their blitz attack have recaptured it from us in one day. The Brigade is cut up and scattered. The Fascists with their concentration of planes have immobilized our transport and while the planes keep our men pinned to the ground, their

armored columns slice through our lines encircling us unit by unit. Whatever is left of the Lincoln is heading towards Hijar; the British are fighting toward Caspe; the Spanish are dis persed in all directions. All we have is what's left of the Mac Paps, two to three hundred men. In the morning we make a weapon-<:ount. We have no mortars left, no machine guns, we find only 153 rifles in the entire Mac-Pap battalion, a few cases of grenades, and small arms ammunition. We halt in a bar ranco. I find a culvert about three quarters of a mile ahead of the Brigade Command Post, twenty feet under the road, almost

high enough to walk erect inside, the perfect bomb shelter, and I set up what's left of the Commissariat there. We have just about enough room, I have only about nine men with me now, the rest have scattered during the retreat. The culvert is dry, there is no water in the gully leading from the mountaintop into the deep barranco way down below which runs parallel

with the road. I walk back to the Brigade Command Post set up on a hill

387

at right angles to the road. It is not much of a Post. Major

Nicolai, acting Brigade Commander, is sitting hunched over . his knees, with Ivan at his left. Bob Merriman, Chief of Staff, is lying stretched out on the ground, a few other staff officers are sprawled out here and there. No one feels like talking, everyone is exhausted. I ask Nicolai what the situation is, he doesn't know, he is waiting to hear from the division. He looks apathetic, a hell of a commander to have in a time like this. I ask Merri man where our new lines are. He points to the mountain ridge above the road where the figures of a few men are outlined.

His reply is startling, he speaks in a low tone. "There is nothing between us and the Fascist except those

few scouts on that ridge." He watches the impact of that sink in, then arises. "Come, Voros, let's take a look."

We climb to the ridge and look. The terrain stretches for miles, all we see are mountains and valleys and glimpses of an empty road in the distance, but no movement anywhere. The beauty of the scenery doesn't register-the sinister presentiment of danger and menace does. We talk with the scouts, they hearten at sight of us. They are weary and sleepy, but dependable; they are all party members. They have seen nothing suspicious, no sign of pursuit at all. Merriman and I go back. The descent is worse than the climb, we slip and stumble on the trailless way down. We rejoin the group and sit around, no one shows any sign of initiative. We're waiting for news from the division and there is little inclination for talk. Finally a motorcycle mes senger rides up and reports to Nicolai. He jumps up excitedly, speaks rapidly to Ivan who translates, we are to withdraw to kilometer stone 70 on the Aldmiz Road and await further orders there. We have but one map between us but I remember the road. The officers are all getting to their feet, I wave a salute to Merriman and go back to get my staff started on the twelve mile march.

When I enter the culvert the men are anxious to know what 388

the situation is. I tell them, "Let's eat first." I don't want to get them more jumpy, some of them are too jittery as it is. We get out some cans when a sudden clamor erupts on the road above, shouting and yelling. The cries are incoherent and the culvert reverberates with the pounding of running feet overhead.

The shouts are now closer and more articulate. "Fascisti! Fascisti!" comes the panicky cry. My men rush out and I follow them. The road above is full

Of men running, screaming "Fascisti ! " And they point back. My men are already clambering up to the road and I follow after . I am not as limber as they and they outdistance me quickly. I call to them to wait but none of them will stop. They yell back "Fascists!" and keep running. I see them joining the fleeing horde, even forging ahead with a fresh burst of speed.

"Stop! Stop!" I yell but no one pays heed, the panicked mob soon disappears behind the bend.

The road is now clear of all life both ahead and behind ex cept for one straggling figure who approaches painfully. He can barely run, he staggers and stumbles, falls, gets up on his feet, slips again and lands sprawling on the hard road. I walk back toward him, his eyes are bulging with terror, his wide open mouth is gasping desperately for air.

"DejauJ hombre/" "Calm down, man," I call to hearten him.

He doesn't hear, he clambers to his knees and hands, pushes himself up and runs again, his strained breathing loud like a locomotive. He staggers on a few more yards, then collapses. By the time I reach him he no longer breathes, his mouth is still wide open, his face is frozen in agony. He is a Spaniard. I see no wound on him, he has died of panic and exertion.

I am alone on the deserted road. I strike out ahead and as I round the curve I see everyone is fleeing the road, rushing down into the barar nco, while the Mac-Paps who have been posted there are already out of it, scaling the mountain on the far side, disappearing over the ridge. I am usually quick to get excited

389

but in moments of crisis my mind perversely goes into reverse and makes me abnormally calm. That's what happens to me now and I walk back to the culvert for my poncho and musette. I am about to take along a few cans of food also but change my mind, they would weigh me down too much in escaping over the mountains. I go through the packs abandoned by my men, take all the cigarettes I can find and one loaf of bread.

I climb back to the road and start out toward kilometer stone 70 on the road to Aldmiz. Not a soul in sight anywhere. I look across the barranco and watch a straggler painfully making for the mountaintop. He is stumbling and crawling on, he looks like a small puppet from the distance. The mountains pull me, "Come my way, everybody else is." I have a dread of moun tains, my heart acts up in high altitudes, I'd rather risk walking through fire than climbing them. The dread of wandering around those mountains all alone and lost brings a decision; I set out on the road. The impulse to break into a run is over powering but I hold it down, I must conserve my strength.

I pass the bend and walk on in measured steps. I don't fully believe in the break-through, no more than a half-hour could have passed from the time I was up with the observers, the Fascists couldn't have moved that fast with any sizable force.

Logic is a comfort but it is a fickle one. Suppose the Fascists have infiltrated, unobserved by those scouts? Suppose I'll be surrounded and captured? As a Communist I'll be killed on the spot, most likely tortured first. I pull out my wallet to tear up my identification papers and documents. My Spanish party membership book is red with stiff covers. I am about to rip out the pages, then stop. I am not going to let them capture me alive, my last bullet will be for me, let the bastards know that a Communist will fight to death, that it was a commissar they killed. This defiance somehow cheers me. I am still all alone in creation, there is still danger lurking all around but the road now leads downhill, another cheerful sign. I round another

"Nuestros/" ("Oursl")

"Shoot!" I yell to the Lieutenant, but the tank has completed its turn, it is retreating without firing a shot. I clamber up on the tank to go with them, the Lieutenant yells at me to get down, I yell I am a comrade and hold on. He swings at my hands with the barrel of his long Russian machine pistol and I in

stinctively release my grip before he shatters my fingers. I fall on my face on the road just barely away from the iron treads that are now crunching by, a few inches closer and they would crush me. I get to my feet cursing that Russian comrade, the tank is churning away at top speed, I look up the ridge and the

Moors are gone. I walk down the road cursing that Red Army lieutenant,

that lousy Russian sonofabitch of a bastard, and their crappy tanks. Those lousy tanks have never done us much good, they would pull out of battle at the first sign of danger, at the most

390

391

to move back.

Lieutenant curses, I follow his direction and there on the moun

outlined against the sky, then four more trotting up. They stand silhouetted against the sky, Moor cavalry scouts. The Lieutenant shouts an order into the tank, this is perfect. We're in the shade: and the Moors can't see us, it's close range and we can get them all with one shell! The tank shifts into gear but the gun barrel

I walk up to the tank with a cheerful greeting. The Lieutenant

then try German and French, but he doesn't say a word, he keeps surveying the terrain. I stop there, I am now safe. Let the Fascists come, they'll be in for a hot surprise. Suddenly the

tain ridge on the left, the far side of a gully, I see two horsemen

is not turning, it is the tank that is turning, a full 180 degrees,

curve and stop dead in my tracks. There is a tank ahead with a man in the open turret watching through binoculars.

It is our tank and I could shout with joy. Everything is not lost after all, I was right in sticking to the road.

does not respond. He is a Russian. I speak to him in Spanish,

critical points when we needed their support the most, leaving the troops demoralized. I keep cursing him and slowly the tension is gone, I feel I am safe, that I have outdistanced the pursuit. I break off a chunk of bread and eat it. I have been up two nights with only a short nap between but I am neither sleepy nor tired, it is great to be alive. I walk on alone on that deserted road for about a half hour and come to a village. The houses on both sides of the road are lifeless and deserted, the stores around the Plaza are shuttered and dead. I pass the Plaza and just before the road leaves the village I see a stalled truck ahead.

The truck is packed tight with civilians, men, women, and children, mattresses, pots, household wares, also a few unarmed Spanish soldiers in uniform. The chauffeur is a civilian wearing a black leather jacket; he is fumbling with the carburetor and ignition wires, his face is flushed and his temper is short. The people in the truck are shrieking at him to hurry up before the Fascists are on them, he curses and shrieks back. I go over to help him. I know nothing about his trouble and little about the engine but I see his carburetor is flooded and help him drain the glass jar that is full of sediment. The trouble fixed, he gets behind the wheel, the motor coughs and catches. I jump on the running board next to him, the people on the truck start scream

ing at me to get off, the truck is overloaded. The chauffeur orders me off, I refuse and he shoves me in the chest. I lose my grip and j ump down livid with anger. I pull my pistol, stand back and say I am an International, if I don't go, no one else will. This is the first time in Spain I have raised a weapon, and then against the people whom I have come to defend. There is a murmur but no more shouts. Shame overcomes me, I speak to them in Spanish, tell them I have come all the way from North America to fight the Fascists, I came to help them, not to shoot them. Someone in the truck yells out, let him come, others take up the cry, the driver beckons me to get on. I smile and thank them, put away the pistol and take out three packs of

cigarettes, throw two up to the truck, another to the chauffeur and the others in the cab with him. There is a chorus of gracias, I climb back on the running board, and the truck starts. It is overloaded and topheavy, it sways, but it runs.

In less than an hour we reach kilometer stone 70 and I jump off. Everybody in the truck waves and wishes me bueno suerto, we are friends, the Spanish are really the most wonderful people on earth!

Kilometer stone 70 is a low concrete whitewashed post stick ing out of the ground at the roadside. There is not a soul around, the road is empty except for the truck which is rapidly disappearing in the distance. I walk over to the stone to check it from close up, it says 70 km. in black on it, there can be no doubt. I am again alone in the world, the first to reach our destination. I cross the ditch to look around, the ground slopes and farther down I see a small cluster of men, ours.

I walk over, they are guards, four men with rifles guarding two prisoners, one of them is Wallach, the other a young English boy from the British Battalion. I am glad to see Wallach again. He is in rags, his khaki pants are torn, his khaki shirt has only one good sleeve, the other is in tatters. But he still has his pert little mustache which he keeps neat, his smile is the same friendly winning one. He tells me all the hospitals and jails in the rear are being combed and everyone who can walk is being sent to the front. He has been sent with the English comrade under guard to the Brigade, he doesn't know of what good

he will be there. He claims he can hardly walk because of his double hernia but they won't believe him, they think he is a coward and antiparty renegade. I believe him and tell him to keep his spirit up, I'll see what I can do for him, maybe I can get Dr. Hene to help him. He remembers Dr. Hene from Paris and is happy. I ask the guards what they are doing here. They tell me they had been sent out by truck from Barcelona to take these prisoners up to the Brigade and someone at Division in Alciniz told them to stop here. I throw a pack of cigarettes to

393

392

Wallach to share with his English comrade and give another pack to the four guards to share among themselves. One guard grumbles that it isn't fair, the prisoners got more cigarettes than they. I ask the comrade would he rather be in their boots ? He doesn't answer.

I walk a stretch down the road and see a culvert, it is a very low one, just barely room enough to crawl in. I am weary and sleepy and hot, the culvert is invitingly cool. I crawl in and stretch out to rest when I hear planes. I crawl back crabwise for a look, I see more and more Fascist formations coming up, circling, departing for Alciiniz. I decide there is nothing I can do for the present, I may as well go to sleep, if the Fascists are to overrun us again I can run faster after I have slept a bit. I put my musette under my head for a pillow, turn it around and adjust it until it feels comfortable. I am worried that this is too risky, the Fascists may come upon me in my sleep. I argue that I am bound to hear the Fascists arrive, there will be

bombing and shooting first. I stretch my arms and yawn, put my head back and I am off in an instant.

Noises on the road overhead wake me, for a moment I don't know where I am. They sound like footfalls, there are many of them, I crawl back cautiously to take a look. It is dusk, I see men ahead on the road, alone and in groups of two or three, trudging on in the direction of Aldmiz, more men are coming up from behind. They are from the Brigade. I stop the ones coming up, soon I have about fifteen, and more are joining as they see us in a huddle. The men are all from the Mac-Paps, they are heading for Aldmiz. I tell them the orders are to as semble here. None of them knows me, I have no insignia of rank, only a tone of authority. Most of them stay, but a few go on, footsore and weary. I have no means to halt them and I

make no issue of it, I tell the men who stay that those finks will be sorry, they will have to march back. Little by little I

394

get the story of the rout-they claim Major Smith had yelled out : "Direction Alcimiz ! Every man for himself ! " And took off. The men naturally scattered in panic. It sounds incredible, but all of them assure me it is true, some claim they heard him with their own ears. Later Major Smith is to deny having given that order and he retains his command. Still later Smith shoots himself in the foot while cleaning his pistol, he claims it was an accident. It is hushed up and he is sent to a hospital.

There is still no one from the staff at the assembly post Krn. stone 70, even the guards and prisoners have disappeared. My group is growing, I have about fifty men now, none of them with rifles, and more keep straggling up. Most men from our Brigade stop but the Spaniards and other Internationals are still fleeing toward Aldmiz and my men are getting fidgety. They are hungry and cold, there is a freeze in the evening chill. They are shivering in their thin, cotton uniforms, they have lost or thrown their blankets away in their flight. I am warm in

my poncho, I am glad I went back for it. An ambulance drives up from the direction of Alciiniz, it

is Dr. Strauss, I know him but slightly. He has come from the medical post in Alcaniz for information and orders, he has questioned the fleeing men he met on his way, he can't believe either that Major Smith actually gave those orders. He is slim, blond, and very serious, a conscientious young doctor with a good reputation for steadfastness. I ask him to drive me to Alciiniz, a distance of 20 kilometers, to dig up some food for the men. There are no commissars or officers in the group which now numbers close to a hundred, but I find a Canadian political delegate. I put him in charge and tell the men I am going to

bring them food. I climb into the ambulance which is nothing more than a converted Ford station wagon, and Dr. Strauss drives me to Alcaniz.

Just outside Alcaniz I notice three brand new antiaircraft guns, their long, slim barrels arching gracefully into the sky

395

T

in the moonlight. That sight makes me happy, now at last we have something to defend us against the planes. In Alciniz I make contact with the kitchen staff of the Lincoln Battalion but they have neither food nor stoves, their kitchen truck was lost in a plane attack. Finally I find the brigade staff kitchen and wake up the mess sergeant. He is a short, stocky Englishman, a good cook and a personal favorite of Lieutenant Colonel Copic, the Brigade Commander. He is well supplied with coffee and delicacies but he refuses to make his stock available to the men. He has strict orders from Copic that those supplies are for the staff mess exclusively, he is responsible for them. I finally prevail upon him to let me commandeer his supply by assuming full responsibility for overriding Copic, and give him an order to that effect in writing. He is dubious about my au

thority, he is a former regular British Army man and knows the men have to be fed. To overcome his apprehension I sign Doran's

be much good in the line anyway. By the time I get back, offi

to them as soon as we can prepare it. We drive back to Alcaniz and I set the cooks to work again,

they are mutinous but I shut my ears. We set out again with

..

396

7'

freshly cooked food and coffee just before dawn in search of oun aspe. e entire sector IS III chaos, no one kows anything. The road is full of stragglers, most of them. lthout rifles, wandering aimlessly about; empty

. lost Ults. The

trucks are dnvlllg up and down trying to connect with their



affrding a respIte for establishing some sort of liaison, yet no Ull1 seems to know where Doran's group is. Finally we stumble on It.

I find them straddling a sunken road, in two hastily dug trenches thrown up overnight. They are a sad, dejected lot, the appearance of the food truck with warm food and coffee lifts their .spirits somewhat. Including those men I have rounded up last lght, less tha 300 men are manning the line. Many of them are III tatters, theIr uniforms torn climbing the mountains. The trouser legs of one man are ripped in the seam from ankle to crotch, as they flap in the breeze his scrotum bobs comically. The men are shivering, more than half of them are without blankets.

Dave Doran reviews the situation for us. He feels confident we can hold. The Division has been promised reinforcements

the French Peopfe's Front Government is going to allow artiller and antiaircraft to come through; Moscow has promised fighter planes to contest the paralyzing Fascist superiority in the air: as Communists and anti-Fascists our job is to hang on by our teeth and hold out until that aid arrives. It is a good political talk and puts heart into the wavering.

ascist planes are absent so early in the morning,

;

I send the food truck back and Doran tells me to survey our need. We seem to need everything, weapons, ammo, food,



oes, blankets, men. It is midafternoon by then, many planes are III the sky but so far we're not bothered. Doran asks me to go back and find the brigade intendencia and armory, they must be somewhere around Alcaniz, and send back whatever I can. He is very sore both at the quartermaster and the armorer they have made no attempt to get in touch with the brigade com:

397

clothlllg, s

1'1

the improvised new line ar d C ' Th '

ropes. I don't blame him, I myself fear Copic's wrath, but those

name also to the order. We light a big fire and start making coffee and stew. The

smell of cooking attracts a number of men to the fire, most of them Spaniards from the Brigade but many Internationals as well. While the food cooks I round up two trucks and after the men gathered around the kitchen are fed, I load them on the trucks and take them back to the post, with the kitchen truck following in the rear. About a dozen of them refuse to get on the trucks and some others jump off later on the way. That bothers me but there is nothing I can do about it, they wouldn't

cers have taken charge. Doran has established a position near Caspe, the men would be taken there as soon as they were fed. We have no more food left and I go back with the kitchen truck to Alciniz, sending word to Doran that I'll be bringing up food

i

mand. He feels the yellow bastards must have withdrawn half way to Barcelona by now.

I am very weary, I have no transportation, and it is a trek of more than 30 kilometers. I haven't slept for three nights in a row except for two stretches of short naps, my eyeballs are dry in their sockets and inflamed, my eyelids keep closing down and I have to use my fingers from time to time to keep them propped up. I start out and I am less than a hundred yards away from

the dugout when the planes discover us. I look up and count about fifteen formations of three heading

in our direction. I walk on until I see the planes going into a dive, then throw myself to the ground. The air again fills with the pulsing throb of the motors. I hug the trembling earth and mechanically count the explosions, five, six, eight, and I can count no longer, I try to open my eyes but the lids are glued down fast, I am losing count, the world is one stupendous roar

The quartermaster is a heavy-muscled New Yorker with light blond h.air, he .is. familiar with my name from the Daily Worker yet he IS SUSpICIOUS of me. He is having his meal seated at a table, plates, forks, and everything. H e doesn't invite me to





join Madnd hungnly eyeing through the plate glass the diners stuff ing themselves inside the luxury restaurants. The room we're in is stacked high with boots, uniforms, blankets, socks, under wear, every conceivable gear for which the men in the line hunger. Through open doors I see other rooms similarly piled to the ceiling. I am awed by this profuse wealth and move to the shelves to finger the goods. The Intendant watches my every move suspiciously, like a farmer with a hungry loiterer around his chicken coop. He doesn't stop eating for a long time. When he finishes, there is still some roast rabbit left on the plate. Only then does he ask would I want a piece. I am so hungry that my stomach pains, it takes effort to refuse. "No, comrade," I dismiss it, emphasizing the word "comrade."

watch him eat I feel like one of the beggars of

I, "

and I lose consciousness. .

.

.

'f

'f

im. As

When he hears that I want 150 blankets, a similar number of pairs of pants, tunics, about a hundred pairs of boots, canteens, 250 pairs of socks taken up to the lines at Caspe at once, he stares at me in outraged disbelief, a miser about to be robbed of his hoard. Then he starts fighting back, he won't do it, blankets, uniforms, and other gear will be issued only at proper times and according to regulations.

I explain the situation to him but this only confirms his stand, the men had been issued blankets and if they threw them away or lost them it was their hard luck, it would teach them to take better care next time. He is full of hatred against the men in the lines who are in a conspiracy to rob him of his property. I can't help being sarcastic, did he come to Spain to hoard goods, to keep shop, to undermine the fighting capacity of the others, or to be of help?

He has heard that one before and he is ready with the answer, 399

all!"

"'

!)

"He's not dead, he's breathing," the voices say. I turn over and see three volunteers, two standing, the third one kneeling by my head. I rub my eyes, stretch and yawn, and I hear one of them exclaim in disbelief, "The sonofabitch has slept through it

I get to my feet, the field is dotted with fresh craters.

The news is good. The bombs missed the trenches, fell into this field, only a few are wounded. I couldn't have slept long, the sun is still in the sky yet I don't feel sleepy any more. I walk toward Alcaniz. I hitch rides when I can, two of the trucks are lost to strafing but we have jumped out in time. I reach Alciniz still by daylight, learn the probable location of the in

tendencia from a brigade truck driver, and hitchhiking part way,

"Many casualties?" I worry.

walking the rest, I finally find it.

398

I

his job is to help fight the Fascists by seeing that scarce supplies are not squandered recklessly.

By now we are both yelling and a number of his men crowd into the room to watch. He is on home territory, all his men are on his side-I am alone and outnumbered-outfought and outshouted.

"You win the argument," I concede, dropping my tone.

They all grin satisfied, their shopkeeper souls can again rest happily, they have been through many such battles before. The Intendant picks up a pair of knee-length heavy wool hose. He offers them to me as a gift and patronizingly asks if I want a pair of boots or anything else. I am ready to explode but I must control my temper. I pause a few seconds, then say:

"This is what I need and have come to get," and read off the list again. My voice is low but tense. "I want them loaded at once and taken to the Brigade Command Post. I want them there before 10 o'clock this evening!"

The Intendant is still belligerent, he won't give up. "Put a Communist in charge of a load of goods and you get a Capital ist," I reflect out loud. The Intendant casts off the insult like any trader and concentrates on saving what he can. He claims he hasn't half as many blankets as I want and he is short of everything else. I have counted nearly two hundred blankets .[ with my eyes but I don't want to argue. I ask him for his in

ventory list. He claims he hasn't a new one and suddenly chal lenges my authority, demands a written order. I write him out one and sign it with my name and title. He refuses to accept it, he wants me to go back and get an order signed by the brigade commander or brigade commissar, that's the only order he would

accept. I write out a new order, sign Doran's name to it as per me.

He refuses that one too. I lay it on the table and give him a last warning.

400

"There are your orders. If those blankets aren't there by 10 o'clock I'll be back again, but for you."

There is silence as I leave. At the door I turn back. "And bring an inventory list with you, a new onel" Let the bastard sweat over it, we should know what supplies

we have anyway. I would like to ask him for transportation back to Alciniz but I know he would refuse. I am not even sure that he'll obey my order, but I feel I have scared him suffi ciently not to disobey. Two days later he reproaches me bitterly that I made him lose 150 new blankets. I tell him wearily that we also lost those 150 men, but that doesn't register with him at all, he mourns those blankets.

I can't get a hitch back, I have to trudge on wearily, hour after hour, again alone in the night. This is one hell of a lone some war, I wish I were part of a squad and moved only when the others did. By the time I reach Alciniz it is around three in the morning. The cooks are up, preparing breakfast; I am too numb toeat and refuse even coffee. The food should be ready in about an hour, I have almost a full hour to sleep. The night is bitingly cold but I find myself roasting close to the fire. I move a bit away, stretch out on the ground, pull the hood of

my poncho over my face; this is heaven, and I am blissfully asleep. . . .

The clatter of food kettles being loaded on the truck wakes me. Dawn comes early in Aragon in March. I wash my hands with soap and warm water for the first time in weeks, also bathe my eyes and face. The mess sergeant is preparing an omelet, I see him break six eggs into a pan, genuine real eggs that I haven't seen for months. I hope he'll share it with me. He brings all of it over, it is all for me. I fall to it greedily, wipe the last morsel out of the pan with a piece of bread, wash it down with cups of coffee, and we're ready to start. The brigade

401

staff mess sergeant, a Lancaster man I believe, is coming with

kitchen attendants are riding in the truck.

on the left to Hijar has been cut and so has the road ahead to Caspe. I hear no firing, there are no officers around to confirm or deny this information. A motorcycle runner approaches at high speed from the direction of Hijar and skids to a stop. He is all out of breath, he was fired on by small tanks and armored cars blocking the road about 10 kilometers back but has man aged to turn around and escape. The truck drivers are jittery, they don't know what to do. I leave them and decide to go on ahead.

g

402

h tho "Y

403

easing. The road is very rutty now, the truck bounces hard as it hits the potholes, and by the time we hear the shells we also see them explode only yards ahead of us. The driver guns the motor and we bounce over the craters so hard I bump my head on the roof. We reach the cover of a thick olive tree by the time

the next salvo explodes. Three more shells come in rapidly one after the other, and

then three salvos-they are searching for us but can't see us. I climb down and walk ahead crouched down, keeping close to the road, until I get to a knoll. I crawl up there and still see

and dust. The tanks are firing, the shells explode ahead and to both sides of the road, we drive through the smoke for dear life until there is no more shelling. The shells come again as we climb the railroad embankment but we are already on the other side, they explode behind us. The sergeant and the chauf feur talk about the narrow squeak, my mind is on Doran. They were not tied to the road, they must have cut through the en circlement.

nothing, I stand up and see nothing, not a soul anywhere. I walk back to the truck and discuss it with the mess sergeant and the chauffeur. They are both party members, good, dependable men, they agree to chance it, the men must have food to fight, the least we can do is risk it. We can't figure where the shell ing comes from, what stretch of the road is under fire. I take them for antitank guns. I guess we have about a mile to go, with luck we can make it in less than two minutes.

The chauffeur guns the motor and we're off in a rush and then we see them, small Italian tanks straddling the road ahead, firing directly at us. The chauffeur goes into a wide turn and we skid into the ditch, the rear wheels spin and then hold, we are out of the ditch now and back on the road in smoke

us. He is a fussy man around his kitchen but b! no means lacking in courage. He doesn't have to take the nsk, we my have to drive through fire. When I tell him that, he shakes hIS head, he wants to make sure that his truck gets back. There re three of us in the cab with the chauffeur, the four Spamsh

As we start there is little traffic, soon we encounter more and more trucks but the traffic is all one way, back to Alciniz; we're the only ones heading for Caspe. The significance of that does not occur to me for quite a while, not until we hit a cross road. There is confusion at the crossroad. A number of trucks have pulled over to the side, a group of men arguing in the center of the crossing. I get out to investigate. They say the road

We blow the horn and the men in the middle of the road give way, they stare at us and a few yell warnings; we shift gears and keep going. The men in the parked trucks eye us as we roll by. I feel queasy and my stomach tightens as we. pass the last truck and see nothing ahead but the rutted road, ommous and deserted. We cross a railroad track and when we mount the embankment the vista is clear, we see or hear no sign of fi hting. We should be near the line now and if the Fascists were advancing we ought to hear firing. We ear no mg. ou can't believe every rumor," I reassure the chauffeur and the n:ess

sergeant, also myself. I am still on the alert but feel the tenslOn

:.1

. '1I '1.

The crossroad ahead is busy now, trucks at high speed con verge on it heading for Alciniz. Foot soldiers are on the road trying to get on the trucks, the trucks do not slow down for

'I

them and they run alongside until they can grab hold and pull themselves up. A man ahead misses and staggers back, another truck is coming up but it won't slow down, it hits the soldier with a sickening thud and throws him flying ahead. Another truck follows by, it won't slow down either, it runs over the comrade without even braking, the other truck behind sees the body but won't slacken, runs over him too, then another. By the time we reach the comrade he is smashed to a pulp, our chauffeur gives him a wide berth but he won't slow down either. I do not know from what far land that comrade came in response to the call of international solidarity, nor what far country gave birth to those comrades of his who have squashed him into a smeary blob on the road without bothering to slacken their speed.

That speeding didn't help them any, a few minutes later we all slow down, then crawl, and then we're jammed solid. We sit in the trucks waiting, the road is packed with vehicles as far as the eye can see, front and back, no room to turn around. That road has been hewed out of the mountain with a steep drop into a barranco way below, not a chance to pull off to the side. We wait in the truck for the jam to clear, all eyes are scanning the sky. The sun is up high, the Fascist planes may turn up at any moment.

on us without an overcoat, in a faded navy blue suit jacket and a scarf around his neck, asking Frank Ryan and me out for a drink, and my favorite book of his, Farewell to Arms. He is a great artist, his description of the panicky retreat at Caporetto in Italy in the First World War, the vehicles helplessly jamming the road, is more vivid to me even now than what I see spread in real life before my very eyes.

The waiting stretches out; not a vehicle is moving. I walk ahead picking my way in and out through those stalled trucks for more than a mile but all I see is an immobile column of vehicles stretching to the horizon. I walk back and as I reach

.4,04

e ruck I see all eyes glued to tiny black specks in the sky cuclmg around and around in the distance, then wheeling in our direction.

uAviacionl" sounds the panicky cry, uAviacion!"

The trucks come alive with men jumping off and swarming down in panic, they flee down into the barranco, many lose their foothold and roll down like logs. They don't look like planes to me, the formation is too irregular. I believe they are birds and sure enough, there is no mistake about it.

UPajarosl Pajaros!" ("Birds! Birds!") I yell but no one pays attention.

The vehicles are all deserted now. My men did not run, they stand beside the truck. The Spanish comrades are laughing up roariously, yelling insults to those men who are still hugging the ground, calling them conos, conejos, cobardes sin cojones (cunts, rabbits, cowards without balls). Some of the men sheep

Ishly reboard the trucks, but most of them keep running i n panicky flight.

I have no idea when that traffic jam will clear, there is no sense in my staying with the truck. I tell the sergeant I am going back to Aldmiz on foot. Alciniz is a strong town, I am sure it will be defended, that we'll halt the fascist advance there. That

town is full of troops, I'll see what I can do there, I may find a lot of stragglers from the Brigade, get some news from the division.

It is difficult to walk on the jammed road. I leave it for a trail that I hope leads to Alciniz. There are other men on the trail heading in the same direction but they are not from our Brigade, again I walk alone. By now I am used to it. The books I have read about war have conditioned me to trench warfare, that's what I expected to find in Spain. This war is sure different,

I wonder what Liddell Hart would say now. I reach the outskirts of Alcaniz late in the afternoon. The shiny

antiaircraft guns are gone. Traffic is thick on the road, the jam

405

. I think of Hemingway in Madrid in December, walkmg m

.

7

7

has been unblocked. All the trucks are saved, a couple of Soviet Mosques patrolled the air while truckloads of volunteer civilian truck drivers were rushed up from Tarragona to drive the de serted vehicles away. Alciniz is being evacuated. The staff kitchen is gone, I wander around for information but find no one who knows about the XV Brigade. I strike out on the road. Soon it is dark and I have no idea where I am heading nor why when an ambulance pulls up, the driver leans out and asks in

English, "You want a ride, comrade?"

It is Comrade Dicks from Cleveland!

We grin in recognition and we're both very happy. Neither of us knew that the other was in Spain. Dicks drives an old cov ered truck converted into an ambulance. He is a Negro, we are friends from way back. He feeds me with food and stories, he is on his way back to the Division Hospital. He sees I am groggy

for want of sleep and insists I lie down. I protest I want to stay with him in front. He stops the ambulance and orders me inside. I lie down on a stretcher, Dicks pulls out his guitar and it is just like old times back home. He sings ballad after ballad, his voice sounds softer and softer, so soft I can no longer hear. . . .

WI

407

HYPNOTICS

406

Ii

aftern?on by troops that broke under bombardment. We are

be established during the night. The field stretches flat for miles, scary and sinister under the

ghostly . moon. We meet a weary group of four, they've been by a small armored car. They approached happily thinking it



?

urs. They were less than ten yards away when they real

as four of them go away, but they don't know what has happned

to the other five m the group. They still have their rifles, we send

to stop others who may come their way; we'll take them all back later to the kitchen and feed them.

We rive on again, ever further into no man's land, expecting to run.mto an ambush at any moment, scanning the terrain for stragglmg men or wounded. Finally we meet two Germans

rom e Thael



ann Brigade. We learn they are still holding an ImprOVIsed pOSItIOn to the right. They are our sister brigade if

bnngs us closer to the Fascists. We see a flame in the distance,

It is night again-the Brigade as a unified fighting force no longer exists. There is no chain of command, no liaison, no bat talions, no companies, only isolated groups of men putting up last-ditch resistance, holding until surrounded, retreating to other posts, holding with diminished numbers, dispersed, falling back in isolated groups to rally again. The planes attack constantly; the greatest damage they do is to morale. Our poorly trained men panic at the appearance of the Fascist planes, they bolt and

Dave Doran is the rallying point, the nerve center to which all impulses return and which alone serves as a clearing point for co-ordinated action. No matter who breaks and runs Doran can

run leaving their equipment behind.

be depended upon to withdraw no further than he must, to con test every foothold, to improvise some position. The task is to keep locating Doran, to bring him whatever help and supplies can be scraped together, to round up the fleeing men, to get



k to whatever new line Doran is trying to establish. .

them ba The rught IS dark, the line has been outflanked, and the men



scattered again. Jim, the Brigade party secretary, drives up WIth  beat-up small car. He is a tall Westerner in his middle twentIes, I meet him now for the first time, he has quit the hospi tal abruptly at the news of the debacle and returned to the Brigade. We drive back to the field which was abandoned that

searchmg for stragglers to take them to the new line that 11

wandenn around for days since they were routed near Hijar. A few mIles ahead, just at dusk, they were hailed in English

Ized It was an Italian Fiat and bolted. The car fired at them the them back to an abandoned stable we have passed, telling them

we're to make contact with any of our men we must turn lft. e take the left fork and drive on. We are tense, every second

ar

rising to the sky, we drive closer to investigate and son we hear explosions. The explosions come from the fire, glo'1Tlng traers going off in every direction lighting up the sky. It 1S a burmng ammunition truck blocking the road. We pull up as close as we dare and get out. As we advance on foot two men from the brigade hail us. There are two other men from the br,igade stuck on the far side of the burning ammo wagon, they can t get them selves to pass the ammo truck fearful it will blow up at ny minute. We wait for the truck to explode, but it keeps burmng steadily, throwing forth bursting bullets in fiery stars at frequent but irregular intervals.

We can't wait any longer, we want those men. We get back into the car, Jim pulls his neck back into his shouldrs, steps on the gas, and drives straight ahead. The heat is searIng, the ex plosions deafen us as we shoot by that truck, spa.rks envelop us, then we can breathe again; we're through. We p1ck up the men on the other side and make the run again, this time it is easier, like jumping through a flaming hoop in the circus: I lok back and see a great explosion, flaming shrapnel spurtlllg lIke fire works, a case of hand grenades going off.

We come to a group of abandoned, low stonehuts and go through them; some stragglers may have taken re uge here. n the last one we hear breathing, five men are sleeplllg h1dden III the straw, Americans. They wake, panicky, then seeing we're from the Brigade start cursing us for not letting them sleep. They refuse to budge, we prod them, kick the soles of their shoes: "Get up, get going, a line is being organized." They rise gru bling to their feet, they are fighting men we can tell, they sull have their rifles. One of them complains, "That won't do my morale any good." We have drummed morale into them so long he now speaks of it as if it were a part of his body, a new organ that needed special care and attention. .

Another volunteer farts with his mouth and gets on h1s feet. I recognize him, he is a good soldier, a party member. He ad 408

justs his ammo pouch, slings his rifle on his shoulder and calls to the others; "Let's go, you bastards, today is as good a day to die for liberty as any." We direct them to the assembly point, promise that we'll hustle up some food, and leave. We can trust them; with that comrade to lead them they won't beat it.

We search through the night for stragglers, we round up about twenty. Jim goes on to make liaison, I lie down on the ground to catch a short nap, close my eyes. No man's land stretches again endlessly in the ghostly light of the moon, the ammo truck is

burning, the bullets splutter in a shivering spark of fireworks, they arch and rise flamingly, blinding my closed eyes. I screw my eyelids tighter to shut out the sparks, they burst and erupt in flaming shrapnel, burst and erupt, burst and erupt and I am asleep. . . .

The government is reeling, they shower us with panicky ex hortations. Edwin Rolfe, editor of the Volunteer for Liberty, gets hysterical in Barcelona, he sends us truckloads of twopage spe cial editions, one after the other, giving us not news nor informa tion which we crave, but deluging us a la Pasionaria, with shrill

feminine screams of exhortation fathered by desperate fear.

DO NOT YIELD AN INCH OF GROUND TO THE ENEMYl

DRIVE OUT THE INVADERS OF SPAIN NOW IS THE TIME TO STRIKE BACK

The men in the Brigade receive these copies with sardonic laughter. They've been fighting, running, driven from position to position with ever-growing losses, short of rifles, ammo, food, reduced to small groups resisting in isolation only to be told that this is the time to drive out the invaders, to strike back.

ae ruthlessly executed on their orders. The toll is particularly h.Igh among the Poles, Slavs, Germans, and Hungarians, espe cIally among those who came to Spain from Moscow. These are summary executions, carried out in most cases secretly by the S.I.M.-a most convenient way to settle old political scores.

Dave Doran, too, catches the bug, he holds a series of courts martial and condemns a number of our comrades to death for cowardice, for deserting their posts, for abandoning their duties, among them Captain Jack Cooper from Cleveland, commander of our machine gun company, a leading Young Communist League member from Cleveland. Doran is prosecutor and judge at the same time, he rolls the sentence "You're condemned to die before a firing squad" with great relish, lingering on the word "die."

He asks me what I think of the way he has conducted those courts-martial and he's taken aback when I tell him dryly, it was quite a ham Shakespearean performance. Next it is my turn to be taken aback when he informs me cuttingly it will be my duty to accompany the condemned men to the Division and wit ness their execution. Throwing all prudence aside I denounce Doran's act to his face as sheer madness, saying it will bring disaster to the party back home. I tell him none of those men

are guilty of anything, they have simply been caught up in the maelstrom of retreat. I myself had encountered Captain Cooper and questioned him when he was heading for the rear. He was accompanied by only a few men, the last survivors of his com pany. Exhausted as they were, they were still carrying with them the few useless machine gun barrels they had managed to salvage from the holocaust; Jackie Cooper was nothing but a walking corpse intent only on saving the few survivors of his company

until they could be reformed and re-equipped again. Doran threatens me, calls me a rotten bourgeois intellectual, the party would be better off with me dead, without my spreading my degeneracy in this critical moment. We're yelling at each other,

4II

'i

'I

410

We are reforming near Batea, we get rifles, ammunition, men. The Internationals sent up as reinforcements are a pitiful lot. They are men ruthlessly evicted from the hospitals, half-healed

tary offices in the rear, soft and flabby-many of them elderly

there are the newest arrivals, volunteers sent up prematurely. Some have received a week or two of training, others none. This latest group, some hundreds in number, gives us the most concern. We are desperately in need of internationals to preserve at least the semblance of the Brigade being an international one but we need trained men, not such lambs offered up to slaughter.

We have but a few hundred internationals, Americans, British,

Curiously, that back-ass propaganda lifts the spmts of the men. Their contempt for the rear-guard generals explodes into laughter, the best morale builder in the world.

invalids, physically unfit for battle; the sweepings of the mili comrades who should never have been sent to Spain. Finally

Canadians, Cubans, and Mexicans left alive in the Brigade. We're an International Brigade in name only by now. Of the four battalions in our Brigade one is pure Spanish. In the other three, one company of the four is Spanish; in the companies, one sec tion out of four is Spanish; in the sections, one squad out of four is Spanish. The Brigade has been so diluted with Spanish soldiers that the Internationals are acting mostly as noncoms which the Spanish lack. We have no time to integrate the new American volunteers into the units. Many of them sent up during the re treat are trying desperately to keep up with us, running along

with no one to lead them as we are forced back from position to position; a great many of them are killed before they even have a chance to learn what is happening around them.

The terror in the International Brigades is on. To halt the Fascist offensive we need air power, artillery, tanks, armored cars, transport, trained officers, noncoms, and men. The Kremlin leaders think differently ; although they supply us with some material they base their main reliance on terror. Officers and men

I'm definitely at a disadvantage being a subordinate of Doran, when Brigade Commander Lieutenant Colonel Copic, who had been on leave in Paris during the first part of the Fascist Aragon offensive, now rises unexpectedly to my defense. I do not know with whom Copic has associated in Paris but he affirms the power of the free press. He agrees that Matthews of the New York Times, Vincent Sheean, Sifton Delmar, and the others who visit us regularly are bound to find out about the executions and would report them no matter how much sympathy they have with Loyalist Spain. Copic also agrees with me that these executions would turn liberal oplfllOn against us not only in America, but also in France. Copic and I are friends again but still distant, he has never forgiven me for dissipating his store of hoarded delicacies to feed the men. Doran reluctantly consents

to give the condemned men another chance. We move up in almost full Brigade strength, 6>500 strong, only

the staff knows this is a gross illusion. More than half of our men are raw recruits with less than three or four weeks of training.

The Fifth Army Corps is entrusted to stop the Fascists from reaching the sea and cutting Loyalist Spain in two. Our Brigade is divisional reserve, we should be the last to be thrown in. The three Spanish divisions ahead of us are famed Communist crack divisions of the Spanish Loyalist Army. We are aware of our own weakness but have full trust in those Communist divisions. We are convinced they'll hold, we know that when our turn comes we'll hold also. No Pasarfml They shall not pass!

Our reserve position is far from the front lines, even the sound of bombing barely reaches us.

At nightfall we receive the disastrous news. The three Span ish Communist divisions ahead of us, glorified in the Spanish press for their death-defying courage, have pulled out against orders, leaving the front wide open to the Fascist advance. Our Brigade is ordered to defend a sector previously held by

412

a full division to safeguard the approach to Gandesa. The Bri gade has to be divided into two, Copic to defend the northern fork, Merriman the southern one. Doran assigns me as commis sar to Merriman, my first chance to act as commissar in actual battle. I have a number of final chores to attend to, by the time

I am finished and go to see Major Merriman to discuss how I could best assist him, he has pulled out.

I start out before dawn hoping to catch up with Merriman. It is about 12 miles to his designated Command Post, a three and a half hour hike. After about an hour I see a group of men heading back from the direction of the front. They carry rifles, they are in squad strength. Thliy are cutting through the field, avoiding the road, their direction is definitely to the rear. I cut

across to speak to them, I have to shout a couple of times before they stop. They belong to the British battalion, they are lost and are looking for their unit. I don't know where the British bat talion is, I tell them to come with me. They are undecided. As we parley I see a number of other men drifting back, some have

rifles, some don't, they cut a wide circle through the field to avoid us. I ask the British squad leader to stop those men, I want his squad to act as a field guard to halt all men heading back and keep them from frigging off. They spread out at once and halt the drifters. I group them and take them along. We see

more men drifting back ; we stop them all. The British are tough about it, they threaten to shoot those who don't want to turn back. They mean business, they fire after two men who refuse to stop which quickly brings them around.

We have quite a few men now. As we march up I see an officer ahead, pacing up and down the road, it is General Walter. I greet him as he watches us pass and he calls me over. He asks me what troops we are, how many more are coming. He is dis gusted when he hears these are only drifters I have corralled on my way up. I can see the disappointment in his face, he was

expecting reinforcements. I ask him what the situation is, he

413

: I

I

,!

!,

" 'I

shrugs his shoulders with a nervous jerk and turns away from me.

About a hundred yards further ahead I meet Jose Maria Sastn, Division Commissar. Before his promotion to Division Commissar he was Dave Doran's first assistant; we have worked together well and are friends. He is around 26, trim and slender, intelligent, serious, and loyal; he wants to be a professor after the war. He inquires about Doran. I tell him he is with Copic and ask him about the situation. It is not too good. Copic is under heavy fire and is asking for reinforcements. The Division has no re serves and General Walter has applied to the Fifth Army Corps, they haven't any either. Merriman is not at his Command Post, he can't be located. The divisional runners sent to the battalions have not returned.

As we talk General Walter comes striding up. I have met him a few times before, an uncommunicative, forbidding person, usually in a sullen mood. His forehead is furrowed in a deep scowl, he is tense and nervous. He ignores me, curtly informs Jose Maria that he is going to the Fifth Army Corps to see personally about reinforcements, and puts Jose Maria in com mand. The General tells him tersely that the line must be held at all costs and makes Jose Maria responsible for it. He strides away briskly, steps into his staff car, and disappears.

Jose Maria is startled. We both know that the Headquarters of the Fifth Army Corps is about ninety kilometers in the rear, on the other side of the Ebro River. We have been there together just two days before, at a meeting of the Division and Brigade Commissars; Doran took me along. Jose Maria knows that Gen eral Walter will be away for hours, maybe for the entire day, he is also aware that he is not qualified to command a division in battle. He is worried and instructs me to locate Merriman im mediately, have him report to him in person at once.

The Command Post set up by Merriman is on the left side of a knoll which is bisected by a sunken road. I find about fifteen

414

415

:ii,!

I

men there but not a single staff officer. I learn that having desig nated that spot as Command Post, Merriman had gone ahead V;ith the troops, to place them in position personally. By the ame the last umt on the right flank had reached its position it was daylight, and it had to move in under fire. The runner sent back by Merriman told me that the last he saw of him, Major Merriman was leading the last troops personally into line under intense rifle and machine gun fire. No word had been received

then two more to the other units asking for a situation report

port back. Our position follows a low ridge about a mile and a half ahead and is outlined by light smoke and a hazy movement of air above. The firing is intermittent, mostly rifle and machine guns; I hear no artillery, only an occasional mortar. The sector is relatively quiet so far. I relax, the Fascists won't attack in force without strong preliminary bombardment by artillery, planes, and tanks. Merriman has the map, I try to orientate my self without it. The steep mountains, roadless and rugged, on the left flank are held by other elements of the army corps, Copic and Doran are on the right, while our sector is this valley guarding the road to Gandesa. I have only a general idea of our

from him since. I send the runner back to locate Merriman and another runner

with him, the first one to stay with Merriman, the other to re

plan but I know we're stretched very thin. I missed the meeting where the plans were discussed and the instructions Dave gave me were very general. I am to assist Merriman, help him to en force command, see that liaison is maintained, and do whatever is needed to maintain morale, to stiffen resistance; that Merri man is the best officer we have in the Brigade and although I am to be his Commissar, I should take my orders from him.

The runners I have sent after Merriman do not return. I must find Merriman, I can't just sit here without knowing what he wants me to do, nor can I leave that post or Merriman won't be able to get in touch with me. I send two more runners out,

and whether they know the whereabouts of Merriman. Only one of the runners returns. Captain Hernandez, Commander of the Spanish Battalion, reports two attacks early in the morning by the Fascists in company strength, both beaten back with heavy losses to the Fascists. His casualties are light, five men wounded, none of them seriously. He has been also trying to contact Merri man, his runners couldn't reach him. Merriman is reported to be pinned down on the extreme right flank which is under heavy machine gun and mortar fire, he has no liaison with him. Hernandez is asking for mortar and artillery support. I go back to report that to Jose Maria. He is worried about Merriman. He is not a military man, now that General Walter is gone he wants

Merriman with him. Lieutenant Diggs comes up. He is our liaison with the Fifth

Army Corps, a brave and capable officer. Diggs is a young Westerner of college age with handsome features, winsome smile, and erect military bearing which makes him look taller than he is; he is less than medium height. I ask him to get me some artillery and mortar support for Fernandez. He promises he'll try but is not hopeful about it, the Army Corps is under very heavy attack in the northern sector. When I ask him how does it look, his usual cheerful smile vanishes into a frown. He doesn't like it, the Corps is stretched very thin, we have no reserves, little artillery, the promised Soviet fighter planes haven't come.

A little later the Fascists open up with artillery. As the shell ing continues, I see men here and there leaving the line and heading for the rear. The guards stop them as they approach. They all obey but one, he continues in my direction. He is an odd sight, he wears a full wool uniform, a steel helmet, a rifle, a couple of hand grenades in his belt-full official battle equip ment that I have seen no other man in the brigade to possess. I am puzzled. He is a husky boy, an American, broad-shouldered and athletic, I doubt if he is twenty. He walks unseeing, his eyes bulging and unblinking in a fixed stare, his mouth wide

416

open. I haven't seen him before, he must have come up with the last transport of volunteers fresh off the boat. He is in a state of shock, he won't respond to inquiries about his name and unit, only mumbles: "I wanttogohome, I wanttogohome." He makes a start to leave after each question but halts obediently when I tell him to stop, reacting like an automaton. I would like to get him out of here, it was patently wrong to have sent him into battle in the first place, and I wonder what I can do for him. I can't let him go to the rear-he would undoubtedly be shot for desertion and cowardice-nor would it be right to send him back to the lines. I keep him with me, tell him to lie down and rest. He does so automatically, but slips away unnoticed later when the artillery starts searching for the Command Post and shells begin exploding near us.

The Fascist shelling increases in intensity, the situation is grim. Capt. Hernandez sends a runner again asking for artillery and mortar support, also for permission to withdraw a half mile to a better defensive line. I inform him he must hold and send the group of stragglers up to him as reinforcement. I walk back to Jose Maria, he is on his way to see me, we meet halfway. Hours have passed since General Walter left, no word has been received from him. I tell Jose Maria that Fernandez must have artillery and mortar support. He frowns, he has no idea where to get them. He decides he'll go get in touch with General Walter. He tells me the line must be held at all costs, that I am respon sible for it, and he is off.

The Fascist shelling grows very heavy, the line is ablaze with rapid rifle and machine gun fire. No new Fascist infantry attacks are reported, as yet. Our casualties are still light although in creasing, and the line holds fast. I have liaison only with Capt. Hernandez. None of my runners sent to the other units have returned. I do not even know where the other units are. I curse Merriman and his lousy egalitarian streak. As commander, he had no business to lead that unit into position personally and

417

get himself pinned down right from the start, losing contact with the rest of his troops.

Jose Maria's order means that I am now responsible for hold ing the position without having any control over the fighting. I have lost all my regular runners; the ones I am forcing into service now do not know the positions of the units; I can and do send them out but they do not return. I have no contact with Copic and Doran who are with the other half of the Brigade; I no longer have contact with the division either since Jose Maria has pulled out and the rest of his divisional staff evapo rated. General Walter passed the buck to Jose Maria, he has passed the buck to me. I have no one to pass the buck to. I am it. That's a hell of a way of being responsible for command when I don't even know what troops we have.

More and more men come drifting down from the line. We stop as many as we can. I keep them with me as a sort of reserve, by now I have about fifty or sixty of them again. Now I feel more like a commander although I know these men are not much good, most of them will try to frig off when we come under direct attack. A number of shells again land near-by, the Fascist observers must have noticed the concentration around the Command Post. A few shells burst very close and sure enough the men bolt.

"Stay put! Keep your head down! Stay where you are!" I shout, but only a few of them heed me, the others run on des perately with the Fascist artillery pursuing them.

Lieutenant Diggs comes up again ; he is looking for Jose Maria. When I tell him he is gone he reports to me. Fascist columns in force are infiltrating both on the right and left, the Spanish regiment on our left has broken, he fears I am being encircled. He is on his way back to the army Corps to report it. I ask him what does he advise ? He declines, his job is that of liaison not command. Since we're on close personal terms he confides he is glad that he can pull out in a hurry. I tell him I 418

feel we ought to pull back but I have been ordered to hold at all costs. Diggs agrees I have no choice, an order to withdraw might result in a disorderly, panicky rout. When he leaves, he shakes hands, an unusual gesture for him. After a few paces he turns and calls back.

"See you in hell, Voros, hold a place for me!" He grins and he is gone.

The shadows are lengthening, my Ingersoll wristwatch has stopped, no one has a watch. It must be close to five. Shells are now rapidly exploding all over the field and suddenly the line ahead of me becomes alive, figures are rising, and the entire line falls back. They are not running, only walking back, I guess Hernandez has decided to pull back that half mile on his own. But the line doesn't stop, it keeps coming on. I walk ahead to intercept them, the road is full of men passing by me to the rear. I am the only one to walk against the tide and I am con scious of all eyes fixed on me.

T

Captain Hernandez is in the middle of the column surrounded by a core of officers, his tanned face is streaked with blood, his forehead is bandaged. He tells me it was impossible to hold there any longer, they were receiving fire from both flanks, he iiil had to pull out before being fully encircled. He has no further ! news about Merriman.

I explain the situation to Hernandez. The orders are to hold at all cost; since Merriman is away the military command now falls on him. He accepts it grimly. I want to hold where we are but Hernandez objects. We decide to fall back to a hill about two miles farther back, that hill commands the road and is a good defensive post, it provides a good view for miles. Hernandez says they are very low on ammunition, unless I

provide that in a hurry it will be impossible to offer much re sistance. I recall having passed an ammo truck of ours that morn ing, just behind the fork of the road a few miles back. I see a station wagon field-ambulance that has pulled back with Her-

419

I' II'

nandez, it is empty. I ask the driver to take me back to pick up ammunition. The doctor in charge, a nonparty member, ob jects; I can't use an ambulance for transporting ammunition. I tell him to report me to The Hague when the Fascists, who have bombed our hospitals and massacred our wounded in the hospitals they captured, come up for trial before the World Court, and drive back. I locate the truck; it is still there but is nearly empty, only a few cases are left. The chauffeur is glad to get rid of those last cases, he is anxious to return to the armory. I am glad to learn he knows where the armory is located. I tell the chauffeur to wait until I return, that the lives of half of the Brigade de pend on my reaching that armory and bringing up fresh sup plies. He is a good party member, he needs no persuasion. He is nervous but I don't blame him; suddenly I realize I am also tense inside, perhaps even more than he.

By the time I return Hernandez is busy placing his men into position. His command post is in a small cluster of heavy olive trees. He has less than three hundred men. He keeps a core of about forty hard-bitten veterans around his post as a mobile tough reserve, most of them Spaniards. He curses when he sees the few cases of ammunition I came back with; he wants to know how he is to hold with that. Besides, they also need food, his men are very hungry. I realize I am also very hungry. I haven't had a bite since supper last evening.

To quiet him I tell Hernandez I have learned the location of the armory and the Intendencia can't be far away from that. The armory is just outside Mora La Nueva on the other side of the Ebro, little more than twenty kilometers away. I promise to bring up whatever I can, will also try to get reinforcements from the Division or the army Corps. Hernandez urges me to hurry and I am about to leave when I remember something. I pull up formally.

"Captain Hernandez, this place must be held at all cost, and you are responsible for it." 420

I feel silly as I say it, also a bit ashamed. I have passed the buck to Hernandez, just as General Walter had passed it to Jose Maria Sastre, who passed it to me. I know very well that position cannot be held for long unless we get reinforcements. Now that I am pulling out, Hernandez is it.

The Fascist planes catch the truck twice. The second time halfway past Gandesa, j ust as we are passing an antiaircraft battery. We jump off and run into the field, I see a small foxhole and dive in, right on top of Dave Gordon who has beaten me to it, stomach trouble and all. I took Gordon along with me intending to leave him at the armory when I went back to Hernandez, to have him take over in case anything happened to me. Although Gordon is unable to mask his fear as a leading comrade should, he is enough of a Communist to stay put under fire.

The planes come diving in. Bombs burst all around, machine gun bullets and shrapnel whizz overhead, thud into the ground. The foxhole is narrow, short, and not too deep, I am prac tically kneeling on Gordon's back. We're safe from everything except a direct hit or a hit close enough to cave us in. The earth is so big, this trench is so small I no longer worry about being hit. In fact I feel exhilarated knowing that for the first time we're shooting back at those planes and after the bomb run ceases, I stick my head up to watch the antiaircraft guns in ac tion. The field is hazy with blackish-blue picric smoke which shakes and shimmies in the wind, the gunners look like gnomes in the flashes of their guns. The bombers are back again and I drop back into the foxhole, a big fragment the size of a stove lid swishes by my head as I duck, this time I'm really scared.

The planes attack in waves, bombs follow bombs. When they finally depart they leave the field covered with a deep layer of choking dark smoke the eye can hardly penetrate. I cough and wipe the tears from my smarting eyes. Bomb craters are every where, some are huge, some merely scooped-out holes, smoke

421

1!li

Ii '

I

il

Ii. '

, I, . !

I '

is rising from some, others look like freshly excavated earth. The fifty-odd bombs I counted caused not a single casualty. The anti aircraft guns are intact; the crew are grimy with smoke and sweat, their faces distorted by strain. The gunners walk around weary and bent, their weepy eyes bloodshot from the acrid fumes.

We expect the truck to be riddled by shrapnel but we find it intact. We get on and get going, cross the Ebro River over the much-bombed steel bridge which had not received a single di rect hit either, and locate the ammo depot without much diffi culty outside Mora la Nueva. It is now sunset but with plenty of daylight left.

The Spanish captain in charge of the ammo dump, a tall, pale, flabby-looking man in his thirties, is antagonistic. He protests when I request a truckload of small arms ammo, rifles, and hand grenades sent up at once. He claims the truck will never reach there because of the Fascist planes. He wants to await the cover of night. I think of Hernandez and his men facing annihilation after their few cases of ammo are spent and demand angrily that the truck be loaded at once. The captain does not answer back, goes into one of the houses to give orders to load the truck, I presume. I lie down on the ground to take a quick nap but sleep doesn't come. I am back with Hernandez, getting set for a new Fascist attack. I wake with a start, it is getting dark. I walk over to the truck, it is as empty as when we pulled in, no ac tivity around. I run to the house where I last saw the captain enter, I find him at a well-set table, eating his supper calmly.

I storm at him why hasn't he loaded my truck, he answers un perturbed that the truck would be loaded after the men have finished their supper. I feel like murdering the bastard but that wouldn't speed up anything. I yell and curse and threaten until he quits his meal. I walk out with him, follow close on his heels as he issues his orders.

His men are all Spaniards. They go about loading the truck 422

among voluble discussions and arguments, too slow to suit me. I urge, plead, cajole, exhort them to hurry. I appeal to their patriotism and loyalty, praise extravagantly the glorious achieve ments of the Loyalist Army. They smile with pride, say "Si-S[f", but the loading doesn't progress any faster. By the time the truck is loaded and we're pulling out it is night, the stars are bright in the sky.

Mora la Nueva is now deserted as we dash up to the bridge. We're halted by Spanish troops within fifty yards of it. They won't let us proceed, the bridge is about to be blasted. I plead with the Spanish major in charge to let us dash through. He insists it is too late, the dynamite charges are all in place, they will be set off momencito. We argue and fight, he becomes very excited when he learns that our truck is loaded with ammo. He yells at his men who watch me with rifles at the ready to get that truck turned around and driven back a distance.

A messenger rushes up from somewhere, the major screams "Everybody take cover," he sprints back, his men scatter and disappear as if swallowed by the earth. A tremendous explosion shakes the ground, followed by other detonations. A column of flame envelops the middle span of the bridge, a huge section of it rises, steel girders float into the sky riding on tongues of flame. I am impotent with rage, filled with shame and guilt. I see Hernandez entrapped, I should be with him. My fists are

clenched so tight they tremble. That buckling girder is closing the mouth of the trap as I watch, forgetful of taking cover. A large steel fragment whizzes by my head, the air is full of hissing shrapnel, I throw myself to the ground until the air is clear of flying fragments. Flames are still licking the frame of the bridge, they die out slowly one after the other. An awed hush settles on the night. My mind won't focus. I only sense that something indefinable has reached its termination, that an irrevocable finale has taken place before my eyes.

I walk back to the truck, tell the men to stay put until they 423

I, I

:11'

I!"

424

hear from me, and wander around until I come across a wide dugout cut into the side of a hill. I walk inside, it is a high domed large earth chamber excavated from the hillside with

lighted dimly by kerosene lamps hanging from the ceiling. I see a few divisional staff officers in the shadows arguing in

to me. "Where is the Brigade?" he demands in a harsh tone,

"That's what I want to know," I retort accusingly. He doesn't know; he had gone to the Army Corps for reinforcements and by the time he got back here they wouldn't let him cross the bridge. I tell him about Merriman and the position where I

It is more than 25 miles from there to the Ebro. They are

.h

commander to stay with the troops, it was Commissar Doran who should have gone to the Fifth Army. I turn m b k

1m W1t out a word and stride outside. The town i comleely deserted. I walk around aimlessly

when



see a lIght Shllllllg from a big garage. Some men from

our Bngade Auto Park are busily stripping that garage of tools, arts, nd whatever they can find, while the others are engaged III teanng down an inside brick partition. They are cheerful and

connecting chambers to the right and left. The dugout is

Polish and German among themselves. I walk over to them, they know nothing or won't tell, they are waiting for news and orders themselves. I cross into a connecting chamber and unexpectedly see Lieutenant Colonel Copic there in his shiny black leather puttees striding fretfully up and down, talking in Russian to other officers whom I have never seen before.

"Comrade Copic ! " I call to him, and he practically runs over anxiety mingled with relief.

left Captain Hernandez. He gets out his map, I show him our last position, he shows me where he left Dave Doran.

left deserted on the other side, cut off from all supplies, trapped by that premature, panicky blasting of the bridge. They should have let us withdraw and defend that bridge, hold it open until the last minute, until all the troops got back safe. The Ebro is too wide and deep to ford, too swift for most men to swim. Doran, Hernandez, and the men with them will be hunted down by the Fascists like dogs. Neither of us says this out loud but we both know it. We also know that we have lost the Brigade. We glare at each other without uttering a word. Copic resents seeing me alive, my eyes full of accusations. I resent seeing him alive in his pressed uniform and shiny black puttees. It was Lieutenant Colonel Copic's duty as military

h

425

of abandoned army vehicles and they are busy towing away



truc

s, cars, motorcycles, everything with wheels on. They are teanng down that partition to get at a bus the owner had walled in there to hide it from the government. It is a beautiful luxury passenger bus, brand-new and shiny with red paint and chrome; we gape at this symbol of a long-forgotten peaceful civilian world. Even those cheerful scroungers are awed; taking tht bus seems like out-and-out theft to them and they are not



his bus is d:finitely a civilian vehicle, they feel they

th1eves. have no nght to take 1t, nor can they bring themselves to leave

They want the bus very badly but are afraid of the possible consequences. They draw me into the debate. I, too, want that bus for our Brigade, but I'm similarly apprehensive. Finally we argue it .out that the owner of the bus, by hiding it, is ipso facto a Fasc1st. He should have declared it to the government. The. right thing to do is to take the bus into custody to protect the lllterests of the government, and turn it over to the civilian authorities later, if so requested. That sophist decision pleases ever.yone and the bus is towed away in triumph. By then it is gettlllg along toward dawn. I go back to the dugout and find

happy about it, most of them are New York boys who take a great pride in "organizing" whatever they can lay their hands o, stealig whatever they can to keep our Brigade supplied w1th veh1cles. They find that town a veritable treasure trove

y ac on

it there for some civilian government officials to grab.

about thirty men from the various units in the Brigade sleeping

any more, yet I retch and retch until I wake up in the morning

on the ground. I lie down too and close my eyes. Sleep is around but won't settle: Hernandez, the planes, the ternfied boy with the bulging eyes, the exploding bridge all merge into a pinwheel that whirls around and around until I am dizzy and

We have recrossed the Ebro in a counteroffensive, have fought our way back close to Gandesa. After a short rest we are moving back to the line again. Paul Wendorff, my former as sistant on the Historical Commission, is on my staff now, he was sent to the Brigade when the Albacete base was moved to Barce lona. When the Brigade goes into action, the political members on the Commissariat staff are now divided among the battalions to assist the battalion commissars. I assign Wendorff to the Lincoln, the British is reserved for myself. The British are our shock battalion and I like to work with Bob Cooney.

This time the Lincoln is scheduled to attack. Wendorff, who had been at Jarama for many months, feels the odds are against him. We discuss that. I hold that the chances are the same for everyone every time he goes into battle regardless of how many previous engagements he has been through. Wendorff feels the cumulative chances work against a man, he is downcast and gloomy. Since the British battalion is to be in reserve in this engagement, I decide to change places with Wendorff and assign him to take my place with the British in the rear. Wendorff's eyes moisten, he mumbles words of gratitude. I shake that off brusquely. He is a big strapping fellow, I don't want him to feel embarrassed later for that temporary funk.

The Lincoln makes a surprise attack at dusk which collapses at the start because of poor training. The men lose contact with each other in the dark, they stumble around loosening rocks and alert the Fascists who meet them with mortars, grenades, machine guns ; their artillery lays down a protective barrage and the attack has to be discontinued.

In the morning when Wendorff calls in his report, he sounds very cheerful. The battalion is ten kilometers behind the lines, the Battalion Post is well hidden and camouflaged against planes.

427

black out. . . .

NARCOTICS



aching in every bone.

..

overing

The operating room is in a tent, the flaps are drawn tightly to prevent telltale gleams of light escapin into the night. The air is stifling hot under the bright gasolme lamp; amputated arms hands, and legs overflow onto the packed dirt floor from

ion Sur lry arms are bloody past the elbows, his rubber apron IS dnppmg blood on his shoes. He has been operating without a stop for more than

the l





rge wicker basket in the corner. Dr. Broggi, Divi



. , hl





h

twenty-four hours. It is now way past midnight, but t

geon, is operating on a bullet-perforated bell



re is still a line of stretchers with belly and thigh wounds awaItlng emer gency surgery outside. I am standing at his side feeding him



h he is totally exhausted, his quick, sure fingers move WIth

cigarettes, placing them in his mouth for short puffs. Althou







precision. He sews up the incision, drop staggers out. I follow him and catch hIm as he IS about to collapse, lay him gently on the first stretcher near-by which is sticky with blood. By the time I lift his legs on to the stretcher he is asleep. I go back to the tent. The tiny operating nurse who looks like a girl stunted in early growth is also groggy, but she stays to clean up. No orderly is around and she tries to carry the heavy can full of dead tissue, blood, and muck out of the tent all by herself. I run over and take it from her. My hand

his instr

ments, and



wraps around a slimy, snakelike object that slop handle. It moves under my grip, a piece of large mtestme. I nearly drop the can in fright but stagger outside with it, lay it down and retch. I retch and retch until nothing comes up 426

ove

the

T

He is happy with the British, thinks they are wonderful com rades. An hour later the British Battalion calls-a stray shell exploded at their Command Post, one of those freak accidents of war. Comrade Wendorff was killed instantly, no one else was hurt.

I strike out at once for the British Battalion. One of the boys around Headquarters is a promising young Spanish YCL-er, I take him along for company. The boy chatters about what he plans to do after the war, asks me whether he should be a doc tor or a lawyer, but I hardly hear him, my mind is on Wendorff, I keep seeing his large moist eyes. I become aware that I do not hear the boy's voice, I look around and see him half kneeling, tying the broken string of his rope-soled canvas zapata. I slow down but do not stop, let him catch up. He is running after me, we're going downhill, he has changed sides, he is in line with me but on my other side now, still a few yards back, when I am stunned by an explosion and hit by flying dirt.

I shake off the earth, rub the dirt out of my eyes, massage my ears to stop the ringing, and only then do I hear his screams. He is twisting on the ground with one leg gone, the other at a crazy angle, his stomach one big bloody wound.

"Help me, comrade, help me ! " He moans. "Help me, Com rade Voros l " he murmurs, his eyes beseeching me. There i s nothing I can do. I squat down beside him, lay my hand on his head. He whispers but I can't make it out, his pleading eyes are on me; his lips move and then he stops breathing.

I am still in shock, I keep stroking his forehead, his face dis solves into Wendorff's tear-moistened eyes. If I hadn't brought that boy along, if I had stopped when he was tying his zapata, he wouldn't have strayed to the other side of me, he would have remained on my left, if I hadn't been soft with Wendorff and traded posts with him . . . "THAT ISN'T SO!" I scream inside. "Stop blaming yourself. The chances are one in a billion for you to have been in exactly the same spot where the shell that 428

I'

wake my pillow is wringing wet, the sheets are twisted and damp with sweat, the muscles in my face are taut, my spine feels

"Nor"

"Your old ague must be acting up again," I hear my wife say. I look up, she stands at my bedside, her voice filled with concern. "I had better call the doctor."

"No. It's all over," I assure her tonelessly. But I know it is not

killed Wendorff landed, where this boy got hit instead of youl" That doesn't work, the boy and Wendorff now merge into one bloody mutilated corpse, four eyes are beseeching me for help.

. my IpS move, no- o-NOI" My breath chokes in my lungs, my eyes fill with tears and the next morning when I

empty of marrow.

..

N

over, it will never be over. . . .