In the spring, 1936, Comrade Roberts, the Comintern's American representative, fresh from a trip to Moscow, came to attend our District Plenary meeting in Ohio. He greeted me cordially, which surprised me—he usually kept aloof and distant from us. I was late coming in, the meeting had already started. He was sitting alone, as usual, in a far corner and he beckoned me over—quite a distinction to be so recognized by a Comintern leader. He whispered he would see me later in private and that he had some good news for me.

The "good news" that Roberts had for me was totally unexpected. He told me that the election campaign I had carried on the previous fall had greatly pleased Moscow. It demonstrated to them that I really understood the "new party line," how to put into action the new slogan, "Communism is 20th Century Americanism." I was amazed. That election campaign was fun but it had not occurred to me that it would be noted in the Kremlin. The greatest surprise was yet to come. Roberts informed me that he had chosen me to manage the 1936 national campaign of Earl Browder for president and told me to draw up a plan for it. I was astonished, which must have shown in my face, for Roberts laughed, patted me on the shoulder, and asked smilingly did I think we would be able to poll three million votes for Browder.

"At least that!” I answered unhesitatingly. "Maybe even more than La Follette polled in 1924. With our new party line we can really go places!"

Whether my plan would have worked out or not I have no means of ascertaining. By the time I was ready to present it, the party line had changed again. The new line called for concentrating on the defeat of the Republican candidate without endorsing Roosevelt, under the Communist campaign slogan:

DEFEAT LANDON AT ALL COST—VOTE FOR EARL BROWDER.

I opposed that slogan at the National Convention, arguing that it was idiotic—that it made no sense—that it would only confuse our membership. But I was alone in my stand. As long as that was the party line, it made good sense to all other delegates since the party line was <em>always right</em>.

I still couldn't see any sense in it and of course that was the end of my appointment as the national campaign manager, although I still had to continue as State Chairman of the Ohio Election Campaign Committee, over my protests.

As the election campaign developed, that slogan created utter confusion in the party. The more the Party Central Committee tried to clarify it, the more it compounded the confusion. When the comrades asked me how they should put into practice the slogan "Defeat Landon at all cost-Vote for Earl Browder," I answered with a straight face, according to the Party line "By defeating Landon at all cost and by voting for Earl Browder."

That enigmatic reply satisfied no one. The comrades tried time and again to make me tell them to vote and campaign for Roosevelt or to vote for Browder, which clearly would not con­tribute to the defeat of Landon. I stood pat and referred them to our printed party platform.

The result was as could be expected. The total vote for Brow­der in the entire country came to a little over 100,000, about the same or a few votes less than Foster had received in 1932.

Reporting to the monthly meeting of the Ohio District Committee in January 1937 on the election campaign in Ohio, I pointed to the more than 50,000 votes polled by our candidate for congressman at large as proof that our work had been successful again.

"We still lead every other Party District in the number of Com­munist votes polled in proportion to our membership. As for the small vote of five thousand some odd for Browder, that must have come from the lunatic fringe for almost every comrade I have questioned admitted to me in confidence that he voted for Roosevelt, which bore out my prediction that the party line was wrong on Browder. Personally, I believe in the secrecy of the ballot and therefore I will not reveal to the meeting how I voted. However I want the record to show that Landon was defeated and as a good Communist I want to be given credit for that accomplishment."

Everybody was laughing. John Williamson, the District Organizer and therefore the leader of the Ohio party, routinely moved that my report be accepted. He rebuked me, however, for my statement that the party line was wrong on Browder. The party line was right, it was always right. He recommended that I study Marx and Lenin again and asked me to admit my error.

That would have been easy to do. I was among friends. All they really expected me to say for the record:

"Comrades, I realize my error and I accept the correctness of the party line."

They would even have been satisfied with the statement:

"Comrades, of course the party line is always right. My mistake was that I failed to comprehend it fully."

We would all have known that to be a mere ritual which in no way would have altered the results of that election campaign; that campaign was behind us, water over the dam, let's put a period to it and go on to new and pressing business.

That was all there was to it. Yet I couldn't get myself to comply. That party line was wrong. Previous party lines had been wrong also. I rose.

"If we are really serious about winning over the masses to our program, the right to criticize a party program has to be established. A precedent has to be made and this is the time to do it, when the facts are incontrovertible, when this party line has proved as disastrously wrong as I predicted it would be at the National Convention."

At the conclusion of my speech I took the deep plunge. I re­minded the comrades that although I had been repeatedly promised time off to do some studying and writing, I had always been put off with the excuse, "but not at this critical moment of class struggle." I had been doing full-time party work for the past seven years without a rest and I felt entitled to take a year off for writing and study. I asked for a full year's leave of absence.

"As of now,” I said, “unless you can assure me that by postponing my leave for another month or so the class struggle will become less critical."

That took the edge off. My request was granted amid considerable good-natured ribbing. I felt as if a heavy stone had been lifted from my shoulders.

I would now have a full year to do the kind of writing I had always wanted to do.

I forgot to consider one thing—that officially I was still part of the Ohio leadership of the Party, and even if that were not so—at heart I was still a Communist.
