By late fall I had gathered much information on the early history of American participation in the Spanish Civil War. I had been to every front, tracked down every detached unit, made a survey of every American medical installation, and it was time I saw some action, too—no longer as a visiting observer but as an active participant. I put in for a transfer to the XV Brigade, having discussed it with Major Merriman, Chief of Staff of the XV Brigade, and Dave Doran, Brigade Commissar, both of whom favored the idea.

Fiala, however, claimed that the Historical Commission needed me and refused to release me. I finally won his consent by appointing Paul Wendorff, on my own authority, as my assistant in Albacete, and by agreeing to remain fully responsible politically for my post on the Historical Commission even while with the Brigade. Paul Wendorff was a history major from New York who had served with distinction as a machine gunner with the Lincoln battalion. He was an excellent man for the position and being somewhat battle-fatigued was grateful for the appointment.

As soon as I reported to the Brigade, Doran sent me to Madrid to assist Captain Frank Ryan with a souvenir book of the history of the XV Brigade which had been promised to the men in time to be sent home for Christmas presents and which was long overdue. My job was to complete that book and expedite its publication.

Captain Ryan's office and living quarters were at the political headquarters of André Marty which occupied the palatial home of the Duke of Velasquez, and I moved right in with him. I mention this because it afforded me the opportunity to meet informally many of the highest figures in the international Communist movement who usually stopped there on their way to or from Moscow. They seemed to be a rather special breed, or perhaps products of the same mold patterned in Moscow, highly intelligent and razor-sharp in discussion, yet very vain and strikingly egotistic even when in their cups. Their professed concern for the downtrodden masses definitely excluded any sympathy or responsibility for the fate of the individual—they all made fun of my "vestiges of bourgeois American sentimentality clearly reflecting the political immaturity of the infantile American Party."

Frank Ryan was unmistakably Irish in the proud way he carried his bushy gray-haired head, from his ruddy face and large hooked nose, and his six-foot-and-some robust figure. He had been a member of the Irish Republican Army, had served a jail sentence in Ireland for terrorist activities, had participated in the early fighting in defense of Madrid, and he was more than half deaf from concussion in a shell explosion. He gave me a rousing welcome and took me out "to wet our gills" before we got to work.

What kept him bogged down was the long list of American officers and commissars he had received from Doran and whom he was to "play up" in the book. That list was broken down into categories I, II, and III, indicating the prominence each man on the list was to receive. In addition, he had been given a similar list by the British, and naturally he had a preferred list of his own on the Irish. His problem was how to glorify all those selected elite and still find space for some sort of history of the Brigade that would include at least some reference to the run-of- the-mill volunteers without whom the Brigade would have had no history at all. I had no stomach for that sort of work but luckily it was not my baby and that harassed wonderful Irish fighter had my sympathy.

I sat down and contributed the missing chapters on the actual history of the Brigade and also worked out a sort of running narrative to tie all the "press agent stuff" together, which completed the book. (On the whole it was a sorry job but the comrades in the Brigade—particularly those whose name or picture or both appeared in it, liked it.) After checking arrangements with the printer, I convinced Ryan that he had seen enough action already and it was my turn now; he was to stay in Madrid and see the book through the printshop while I was to return to the Brigade, which was then fighting around Teruel.

I never saw Frank Ryan again. He was captured by the Fascists during the Aragon retreat while trying to rejoin the Brigade and had been sentenced to death. He languished in Franco's jail for years, because the Irish Republic for whose independence he had fought, would not lift a finger to free him. It was the hated imperialist British government which finally interfered to save the life of this Irish rebel and ultimately secured his release.
