In the summer of 1936 when I drove up to Madison Square Garden from Cleveland as a member of the Ohio delegation to the National Convention of the Communist Party in New York, I found the place humming. There was a festive, welcoming, even carnival air about the Garden; the sidewalks were crowded with cheerful comrades hawking party literature, shouting welcome, clustering eagerly around the entrances to greet the Party leaders. Even the "Cossacks," the mounted police assigned to keep order, looked friendly.

That transformation amazed me. In 1931, when I was transferred by the Party to  Cleveland, the streets of New York were barred to the Communists. They were then living in a sort of semilegality hounded by the police; most Communists were fearful to reveal their identity in public. I surveyed the changed scene approvingly and my spirits soared.

I had reason to be elated. A new venture lay just ahead. I had been picked by Comrade Roberts, the American representative of the Comintern, to manage the 1936 presidential election campaign for Earl Browder on the Communist Party ticket.

As I entered the lobby of the Garden the transformation seemed even greater. The New York Party evidently succeeded in making converts even in the advertising profession. Huge graphic charts adorned the lobby depicting the progress of the various Party activities. One of those charts featured the growth of Party membership and I stopped to examine it. To my astonishment the total membership figure was still incredibly low, not quite 5o,ooo exclusive of the Young Communist League. More than half of the total were new members less than two years in the Party. The bottom line gave the numbers of the oldest members who had been in the Party for six years or more. That figure was somewhat under 3,000.

I looked at that last row incredulously. Familiar as I was with membership fluctuations, I had not expected to find that figure so low. I turned to Mac, a fellow delegate from Ohio, and pointed to the bottom row.

"I'm in that group. Imagine that, less than six per cent."

Mac, a tall, upstanding, dignified Scotsman, long-time president of one of the most exclusive local AFL craft unions in Cleveland, looked at me approvingly.

"Of course you are. We all know in Cleveland you're one of the Old Bolsheviks."

"I an Old Bolshevik?" I asked him, amused.

"Sure. From ‘way back. Weren't you in the Hungarian revolution?"

"Yes, but . . ."

"Weren't you in the Red Army?"

"Yes, but . . ."

"So don't be so modest! Let's go out and have a drink."

From Mac's reply it was evident that I had been given the "build-up" without my knowledge. I did not want to pursue it further then, nor to analyze it. We went out to Jack Dempsey's and had our drink.
