The shop was fun. It was hard work, manual labor, but I enjoyed it. When other new immigrants complained about their "degradation" and cried for their old life in the "old country," I treated them with contempt. My old life was all in the past, buried and forgotten. It was wonderful not to be idle, a pleasure to be working.

Mr. Kourash, my boss, saw to it that this pleasure was prolonged. He kept me busy every minute of the day for the twelve hours I worked. Ours was a nonunion shop and I had to be all over the place helping everyone, cutters, operators, nailers, "working to their hand." Mr. Kourash was smart, said to have been in vaudeville in his youth, a fact which increased my respect for him. He was far above the workers in his shop in brains, also in schooling. Most of the men in the shop could hardly write, some did not even know how to keep their tallies accurate. One thing in particular astonished me. There would be constant arguments between the boss and the cutters as to whether a certain skin was or was not large enough for the given pattern. The boss would usually insist it was, the cutters would argue it was not. To me there was no basis for all that heated dispute, a few quick measurements with the ruler would give the total square inches in both skin and pattern. When I would demonstrate that, the one in the wrong would look at me with mistrust, being ignorant of the most elementary trigonometry. Of course I would be proven right every time by actual results, which made them suspicious of me. After all, I was a greenhorn, certainly no furrier, so how could I foretell with certainty how much one can get out of a skin, when that ability supposedly required years of practical experience.

Within a few weeks I had my own chores sufficiently well systematized to find time to assist the nailers in their work. We really needed another nailer but Mr. Kourash would not hire one, preferring to press for higher production. The nailers produced between forty to fifty collars each. Soon I nailed an additional 15 to 20 collars, which greatly eased the pressure on them.

My cousin had been raised by his boss to $15. Next Saturday I was eagerly awaiting my raise but it failed to materialize. My cousin taunted me about how much better his boss was; besides, that three dollars made a tremendous difference between his new standard of living and mine—he could now afford to eat more. Finally, after another week went by, I mustered up enough fortitude to speak to the boss.

"Mr. Kourash," I approached him with trepidation. "I would like to talk with you." I did not have the chance to continue because he cut right in.

"I want to talk to you, too," he said. "I want to tell you how pleased I am with you. You're intelligent, you're ambitious, you're honest, you're dependable." It was quite a speech and it filled me with gratitude. I thought he liked me but now I knew.

"Now," he paused dramatically, "I'll show you how great my confidence is in you. Here are the keys. I am entrusting you with them. From now on you'll open and close the shop." I was both elated and touched. I was advancing rapidly, indeed. Here I was, only five weeks in America and already entrusted with the keys to an entire shop. Mr. Kourash did not say anything about the raise and it would have been indelicate to mention that in that uplifting moment.

What if I didn't get the raise! I had the keys. It meant getting up still earlier to have the shop open by 6:30, and leaving later in the evening, but it did not matter. I had the keys! One night something went wrong again with the burglar alarm and I had to wait until ten before the Holmes people fixed it. When I mentioned that to Mr. Kourash the next day, he was most sympathetic and told me that next time that happened it was all right for me to nail up a few more collars while waiting.

My cousin was far less impressed with the significance of the keys and I was wondering whether he wasn't right after all. I was determined to ask for a three-dollar raise the next Saturday. It was just and I had more than earned it. The more experience I gained the more work I had to do, and the harder I worked the hungrier I became. I was already in debt to my cousin for $1.20, all of which I had spent on additional food.

The next Saturday I called the boss aside again. "Mr. Kourash, I would like to talk to you." I started where I had left off the previous Saturday.

"I want to talk to you, too," again he interrupted with a majestic gesture. "I want to tell you how pleased I am with the progress you are making. To show how much I think of you, beginning this week I am going to pay you one dollar more."

He was giving me a raise voluntarily without my even asking for it! He was really a good boss, a fine man to work for. True, I had intended to ask him for a three-dollar raise but I couldn't do that under these circumstances. A man is not a pig.
	
Thirteen dollars a week still did not allow me to buy all the food I needed. I was always hungry. My cousin had been raised to $18 that week and the week after that to $20, all without his even asking for it. The season was on, the men in the shop were all working overtime and got paid for it, I didn't. My cousin asked me to go to work in his shop, he had talked with his foreman and he was eager to take me on. That Saturday I went to the boss and asked him for $18 a week. In truth I had planned to ask him for $20, but faltered at the last minute.

Mr. Kourash was deeply wounded by my action. Here he was treating me like his own son, entrusting me with the keys, giving me all the opportunity to learn the trade. He had been accustomed to people taking advantage of his trusting confident nature, of his generosity. But never, never did he dream that I, of all people, would show such ingratitude. He became real angry, and gave me a terrific dressing down, accusing me of treachery, of cold-bloodedly stabbing him in the back.

I felt wretched and miserable. Had I known he would take it so personally I would rather have cut my tongue out than bring up the subject. I tried to explain to him that all I wanted was a few dollars more and only because I was always hungry, that the hard work and the long hours, which I did not mind at all, gave me a much bigger appetite, which in turn put me deeper in debt to my cousin. But every time I wanted to interrupt him he waved me aside. By the time he finished it was too late for that explanation, I was too choked with emotion to talk. I took the keys, laid them silently on the table and went to put on my jacket to leave.

"Where are you going?" asked Mr. Kourash, his voice again gentle and kind as it had always been with me.

"Home," I answered miserably, "you don't want me here any more."

Mr. Kourash was amazed. Of course he wanted me, hadn't he told me dozens of times how highly he thought of me, how much above the average, the common run of shopworkers I stood in his esteem? Not only that, he was going to raise me one dollar to fourteen dollars a week.

But my jacket was already on; besides, I was too emotionally disturbed to listen. To prove how unjust he was in his accusation I told him that my cousin had been raised to $20 without ever having asked for it. Mr. Kourash's face turned crimson.

"So that's what it is?" he roared. "It was he who put you up to this!" He knew my cousin, he would often come to the shop and wait for me to have lunch together. My cousin had a full lunch hour while I would get away only when I could. Now that Mr. Kourash discovered what was back of it all he was no longer angry with me. He told me that he knew from the minute he laid eyes on my cousin that he was a born trouble-maker and predicted that he would come to no good end. He advised me to stay away from him in the future and to inform him that he was not to set foot again in his shop, ever. He realized I had been misled and offered me $15 a week.

By then I was stubborn. I had not mentioned my cousin's pay for the purpose of bargaining but merely to refute his accusations. Now that Mr. Kourash had blamed my cousin, it was important to set the facts straight. "My cousin is getting twenty and I know the trade better, produce more work than he."

Mr. Kourash picked up the keys, handed them to me and said in a soft, gentle, paternal voice, "You will be paid $18 beginning next week." He was so kind about it I felt like embracing him. The raise was to start the next week and it would have been absolutely in bad taste to remind him of that extra dollar for this week he had first offered. That dollar would have bought me an extra hamburger and a double sweet roll at Max's Busy Bee every day that week, for which I greatly hungered, but—a man can't be a pig.

It was a very good season for furs that year and the rush was on. The nailers got hopelessly behind and there was not an unemployed nailer to be found in the entire fur market. Mr. Kourash called me aside one day and asked where my cousin was, he hadn't seen him around for quite a while. When I reminded him that he had forbidden my cousin to set foot in his shop he waved that aside and asked me if I could influence him to quit his job and work for him. That way, since we were close friends, the two of us could be together all day. I told him that my cousin was by then making twenty-five dollars a week. Mr. Kourash said to offer him thirty. My cousin was willing but wanted thirty-five. Mr. Kourash was outraged over that impudence from a greenhorn yet he not only hired him, but also agreed to pay him for overtime, on which my cousin insisted. The entire shop was working overtime until nine every night and my cousin was getting prosperous. He bought himself a new suit, a pair of shoes, three shirts with silk stripes, and even a sapphire tie-pin for thirty dollars.

I was turning out more work than my cousin, I put in fourteen hours a day, and I was still getting only eighteen dollars a week, no overtime. In addition to that I had acquired other responsibilities. I had a system worked out and knew even better than Mr. Kourash where and how to straighten out bottlenecks, what orders had to be rushed out first, and so on. The men would rather turn to me than to Mr. Kourash if they needed anything, preferring to take their instructions from me. It was a gradual change-over and no one knew how it had come about but it definitely improved production. I took stock of the existing situation and then approached Mr. Kourash, boldly asking for an outright raise to thirty-five dollars plus overtime pay, like my cousin was getting.

This time Mr. Kourash did not roar. He took me to his office, invited me to sit down and we had a long talk, a confidential one. He told me, in the strictest confidence, that all the workers in the shop would be laid off as soon as the season was over, all except me. He did not consider me on their level, a worker, but as his assistant, his right-hand man—I was to have a steady job with him as long as he lived. Furthermore, he was getting old. I was making excellent progress, eventually he would turn the entire shop over to me. He had been working hard long enough, he often wanted to take it easier but he had never been able to find anyone sufficiently trustworthy until I came along. It was a serious talk and it opened up a bright future for me. America was really proving to be the land of unlimited opportunity. He also raised me to twenty-five dollars right there and then. As a steady employee, who gets paid whether the shop works or not, of course I was not entitled to overtime pay—a fair and reasonable conclusion.

My cousin and I had been getting along very well except for his occasional cynical attitude which I resented. He jeered again when, in strict confidence, I related my talk with Mr. Kourash to him. Having been less confined to the shop than I, he had broader contacts with other fur workers on the market. He said that all fur workers expected to be laid off after the season, that was why he wanted to make all the money he could to tide him over until next spring when the shops opened up again. He ridiculed me for overvaluing my position, he did not mind from whom he was taking orders, me, Mr. Kourash, or anybody, as long as he was paid for it. My cousin had also been a student in Hungary and I told him I was distressed to see how rapidly he had assumed the attitude of a common shopworker. He laughed and told me I would soon find out that a shop was not an officers' club and the word of a boss in America was not the bond of a gentleman. I saw no sense in arguing against such a prejudiced attitude and so I dropped the subject.

Four weeks later the season was over and all the men in the shop were laid off, including my cousin. My approach to my job had paid dividends. When I pointed that out to my cousin, he merely shrugged his shoulders—he hoped for my sake that I would be proved right.

The next week in the shop was like a dream. I nailed up the few remaining collars and then a small order came in. Since Mr. Kourash was no mechanic that left it all to me and I cut, sewed, nailed, and finished up that order brilliantly all by myself. I was really getting to be an all-around master furrier, the kind that was getting scarce in the trade.

After that order had been filled I set about to clean the shop. I swept and mopped every corner, every inch of the floor, sorted all the patterns, took inventory of the stock, bundled up all loose skins and hung them neatly on the racks. When everything was spick-and-span and a joy to behold, I called Mr. Kourash in and proudly displayed the shop to him. Mr. Kourash examined everything minutely and was greatly pleased. He then pulled out sixteen dollars and told me he wouldn't be needing me any more, I should see him next spring, and to leave the keys on his desk. 

He wouldn't even let me finish out the week!

He even shortchanged me thirty-five cents!
