That winter was tough. I had very little saved and couldn't keep up with my cousin's new high standard of living. He wouldn't eat in any more, he was taking all his meals in lunchrooms and delicatessen stores, sometimes even in a real restaurant; so we separated. I moved to a filthy bug-infested room just off Tenth Avenue, not quite a flophouse but the nearest thing to it. Even though I pulled my rusty iron bed into the center of the room and sprinkled insect powder all around the legs the bedbugs still outmaneuvered me. They crawled around the ceiling above the bed and then just plopped down.

I did not find another job for months. By then I was actually down to starvation level, subsisting on one meager meal a day. I had developed an almost continuous cramp in my stomach and spent hours in front of restaurants just reading the menus. In fact, that was all the reading I did because in that state I couldn't concentrate on anything outside the "Help Wanted Male" ads. Always a voracious reader, I would now sit in the library for hours with a book open in front of me, without turning a page. I was so hungry my eyes would blur and my mind wander, developing delusions.

I had only a few pennies left in my pocket, seventeen to be exact, the day I finally landed a job.

That evening I asked the boss for a dollar loan until payday. The next night I did the same and every night thereafter until the end of the week. I had been hired at twenty-five dollars a week as a nailer. Nailers were then paid thirty-five to forty dollars and

I was a fast one, but I had asked for only twenty-five so as to get the job.

On payday the boss handed me thirteen dollars. I looked at the money and then at the boss. I told him there was a mistake, after deducting the five dollars advanced I still had twenty dollars coming.

The boss said: "No."
"But you hired me for twenty-five a week!"

The boss did not dispute that nor did he claim that my work was unsatisfactory.

"All I am paying is eighteen a week. Take it or leave it."

Borrowing those dollars each day had told him about my desperate situation. He knew I had to take it.

I was learning. I learned that there are variations and degrees in human exploitation. My first boss, Kourash, had exploited my zeal, my na•ïvetéŽ, my ambition; characteristics for which I was personally responsible. Kourash was a rascal; he outwitted me and I could take that without much rancor. But this boss had exploited my desperate need for food, my starving condition, for which I was not responsible, a situation beyond my control. That was inhumanly cruel. I felt like springing at his throat.

I learned that cruel exploitation germinates hate.

Murderous hate!
