Eight years before that convention, I, the “Old Bolshevik,” had little interest in politics. I was then living in Greenwich Village right in back of the Sheridan Theater, in a four-room railroad flat, drawing down a hundred dollars a week as a foreman in a fur shop. I was single, had more than enough for my needs, luxuriating in what for me was comfort, and spending my free time perfecting my English in preparation for a career as a playwright.

By then I had come a long way from that 21-year-old immigrant boy who had landed in New York in the summer of 1921, eager to shake off his last ties with Hungary. I was bursting with enthusiasm for the new way of life, for the humanitarian and democratic ideas America represented for the people of Europe. The first time I had a weekday off and the required extra dollar in my pocket I went downtown to apply for my first citizenship papers. Two of my replies to that lengthy questionnaire still linger in my mind.

The first one called for renunciation of every and all affiliation, allegiance, and submission to all foreign dynasties and foreign governments, to which my emphatic reply was:

“With the greatest of pleasure.”

The other simply asked: “Complexion?”

That word baffled me. Neither my Latin nor my smattering of Greek managed to evoke any etymologically clear meaning. It definitely seemed to have something to do with complexity but [11] I could not guess what. After careful consideration I decided on a somewhat guarded answer.

“In general, yes!” I wrote.

Both of these answers were subsequently corrected by an officious court attendant and I emerged triumphantly, only a few months after my arrival, as an American citizen, almost.

I was proud of that status and could hardly wait for that day five years later when my final papers would be granted and I would become a citizen with full rights to vote. So innocent was I in politics that after I had been sworn in, beaming with pride and happiness, I immediately hastened over to the Democratic Club in my neighborhood.
That Democratic Club occupied a dingy one-time store in the Village, its plate glass covered with flaky orange paint. It was early afternoon and the two young fellows there eyed me with distrust. They were in the back room playing cards.

“Whatcha want?” asked one of them.

“I want to join the Democratic Party,” I told him.

“Whaffor?”

“Because I just got my citizenship papers.” The reply did not appear to make much sense to them. They kept looking at me impassively. I waited. There was silence. Finally the second guy asked:

“What are you, a Bohunk?”

“No, a Hungarian. I mean I was. Now I am an American. I just became a citizen.”

He turned away from me and told the other chap, as if I obviously did not rate a direct answer from him:

“Tell him to come back tonight and see Murphy.”

The first fellow so told me and I left.

That same evening, around nine o’clock, I was back. Although the lights were now on the place looked even more dim and run-down. Three groups of people were playing cards in the back room, clustered around different tables. As I was making[12] my way in, a young man with a stiff straw hat tilted way back on his head who was standing in the doorway separating the front from the back room and chewing on a toothpick, stopped me.

“Whered’ ya think you’re goin’?” he wanted to know.

“I was told to see Mr. Murphy tonight about joining the Democratic Party,” I told him.

“Hey, Murphy! Some squarehead here to see yah!” he called into the back room, still barring my way.

A few minutes later Murphy came out, hitching up his pants. He was the man I had observed sitting at the head of the table where the largest group of players and kibitzers were centered. He was squat, medium height, a man in his fifties. His face was florid, his stomach bulged, and it was girdled by a black belt with a silver buckle well below his waistline. He wore a yellow striped silk shirt, the long sleeves held back by yellow elastic bands.

He shuffled over, his eyes measuring me slowly up and down. He shifted his half-chewed cigar and said:

“Well?“

I explained my just having been made a citizen and that I wanted to become a Democrat. He did not say a word, just kept looking at me. I felt additional explanations were in order.

“I have given this a great deal of thought, Mr. Murphy,” I assured him. “I am opposed to kings. I became a republican already in Hungary and I am still a republican. As a matter of fact, at first I thought of joining the Republicans. But in Hungary all republicans were democrats while here in the United States the Republicans are not Democrats. I want to be a Democrat and still be a republican because I am for a republic. Since the Democrats here stand for the republic also, I have decided to become a Democrat instead of just a plain Republican.”

Murphy just stood there without the slightest change of expression. Finally he spoke.

“Where do you live?”[13
]
I told him.

“Yeah, that’s in my Assembly District. When did you become a citizen?”

“Today.”

“That’s no good. This is August 17. You are two weeks too late. You can’t vote in this election. You gotta be a citizen for three months and with that sonofabitch in the registration I can’t fix that now. Why didn’t you come to me before? I’d seen to it that you became a citizen in time.”

I told him I was sorry but I really did not know.

“Do you know any other Hunkies who live here who can vote?”

Again I did not.

“Well, come around next year, when we’ll have the presidential elections. You’ll be able to vote then.” He was evidently finished with me.

“Wait a minute, Mr. Murphy. Can’t I join now anyway?”

“Yeah. You can do that. You can sign the book.”

He went to his desk, pulled out a book, and I signed my name. Now I was a Democrat.

“Maybe I can do something anyway, even this year?” I volunteered expectantly. “I can type, I can also write English better than I speak it. Maybe I can help you with some money.”

Murphy seemed to turn that last one over in his mind.

“Yeah. Maybe you can help with that.”

I pulled out my wallet and handed him twenty dollars. That left me with only two dollars, but I didn’t mind. I wanted to help. Murphy reached into his pants pocket, pulled out a fat bankroll, took the rubber band off, added my twenty to it, and put the band back on. He did not thank me. He was thinking.

“You working?” he asked.

I told him I was a foreman in a fur shop.

“You play poker?”

I told him I did.[14
]
“Any time you feel like a game, just come around and meet the boys.” I was grateful for that and thanked him. But just so we wouldn’t have any misunderstanding, I added:

“I don’t play for money, only for matches.”

That was a fatal sentence. It terminated right there and then whatever my future association might have led to in the regular Democratic organization. Murphy jerked his thumb upward, signaling the end of the interview, and returned to the back room.

It did not matter. I was a Democrat. And when the 1928 elections rolled around I duly voted for Al Smith and the entire Democratic ticket. Thus I kept my faith with republicanism and democratism as well.