LcI
I i W left the train at a village before it reached Siofok, the only town of any size on Lake Balaton. The carriage awaiting the doctor had room for only four. The sanatorium was quite a distance from the station so I had all our equipment except the rifles loaded in the carriage and sent the sergeant along with the doctor to make arrangements. The doctor was quite cramped and grumbled that the men should carry more of their equipment, but I made believe I did not hear him. I marched with the men although the natural thing would have been for me to ride with the doctor. But I was apprehensive about the sergeant because he seemed to have more than the usual hold over the men, especially his three pals, and besides, it was setting a good example to have the men see me walk with them. The road was very dusty and made us cough. Setting an example always exacts a price.
	The sanatorium was a huge, sprawling building with many outbuildings right on the shore of Lake Balaton. It had three wings, balconies, a few ornamental turrets, and accommodations for about forty convalescents. It had no patients then. They had pulled out when news of the revolution in Budapest had reached them. When we arrived, the sergeant was waiting for me outside; there was trouble about the billeting. The sanatorium had servant quarters for the maids, also separate quarters for the nurses. The doctor wanted the men housed in the stables.
	"We will billet with the maids, we will billet with the nurses, or we will billet in the sanatorium," said the sergeant to me, "but

52
we will not billet with the horses and cows. There are no patients here, all hospital beds are empty."
	I went back to the doctor to take up the question with him. He was resentful.
"If I'd put them in with the servants they'd have all the
maids pregnant in a week, and full of venereal disease. I would have to set up a venereal ward to treat them. If I'd put them in with the nurses, they'd rape them. Those are enlisted men, the stable is good enough for them." He definitely seemed to be less happy about us now that we were here. I reminded him that I had promised the men beds to sleep in.
"But my beautiful linens! Those men are filthy!"
	I told him he had bath facilities and the men would enjoy a good bath. The linen could be laundered. The men would have to sleep in the sanatorium.
	"This is my hospital. I am in charge here," he shouted. "They will sleep in the stable. I give the orders here."
	Here was trouble. I anticipated trouble from the peasants, trouble even from some of the men, but not from him. Apparently there was more to running a detached unit than Captain Sulacek had taught us. It was getting late. We had not eaten since morning and I was becoming irritable.
	"It is your hospital but it is now under government protection. You asked for that protection and you now have it." Since I was in charge of the men, I informed him, I was in charge of finding suitable quarters for them according to army regulations and, therefore, they would sleep in the hospital. I also told him we needed provisions, and that he could either feed us from his own kitchens or provide us with supplies, in which case we would set up our own kitchen.
	"Oh, the food!" he groaned. "I will now have to provide food for twelve people."
	Evidently he had failed to think the problem through before he went to Budapest. He must have acted in panic.

53
	"Thirteen, with me," I said precisely. I was not afraid of him any more.
	"They can eat with the servants," he decided, and left to arrange for it. At the door he turned:
	"I'll hold you responsible for the conduct of your men," he threatened.
	"I am assuming that responsibility," I said, with official formality. It sounded good, but within twenty-four hours I had reason to regret that statement. He really held me responsible and, in all fairness, he had many points on which to bring me to account.
	I billeted the men in three rooms which held four beds each. The sergeant and his three friends stayed in one room together. The men ate their supper in the kitchen with the servants. The doctor did not invite me to have supper with him. I felt slighted but underneath I was glad. I had my meals served in my room.
	After supper I called the men together and explained the tactical situation to them. Peasants were early risers and went to bed early. If a mass assault was being planned by them, it would develop shortly after dark. Therefore, we should all be in readiness from dark until ten o'clock. After ten we needed two men on patrol until twelve, to chase off marauders. After twelve, a single guard relieved every two hours would be sufficient until six in the morning. The day would be their own except for a daily parade at eleven followed by a one-hour drill period.
	They liked it all but the drill. The supper was good, the beds were clean, the mattresses soft, the pay was high, and the hours of duty were a cinch. They presented no objection until the sergeant said that they needed no drilling, they were all experienced combat soldiers, which I obviously was not. They all chorused agreement.
	That was no good. Discipline loosens without drill and respect for command diminishes.
"The drill is not for your benefit but to impress the country-

54
side," I told them. "It is a show of strength. The peasants will never dare attack when they see such a body of armed and disciplined soldiers."
	That made sense to them and it also made good sense to me as I heard myself voicing it. I had not really thought it through before. There were no objections to the drill after that, not even from the sergeant.
	"Let's put out a noisy patrol tonight, two patrols of six men each, and whenever you see anything suspicious, fire. Let everybody hear you for miles around, let the peasants know that we are here," I concluded the instruction.
	The men did plenty of shooting that night. They did not hit anyone, nor did anyone even approach the sanatorium. They were shooting at shadows, or just shooting. They must have shaken everybody in that village out of his sleep. Even I emptied the clip in my pistol, right under the doctor's bedroom, shouting loudly:
	"Head them off! Get them! They are heading towards the poplars!"
	That brought a volley of answering fire from the men. It was fun.
	The doctor cautiously opened the shutters on his window upstairs and whispered:
"What happened?"
	"Marauders. They were trying to sneak into the pigpen," I whispered back.
"Did you get them?" he whispered.
	"Wounded one of them, I believe," I whispered back. I did not know why I was whispering. There were no marauders. We certainly had no reason amid all that shooting to keep our voices low. I could see why the doctor was whispering, he was scared, but I had nothing to be scared of. Whispering, like fear, is contagious.
It was a good night's performance. All the sanatorium's per-

55
sonnel, including the doctor, was pleased. In the morning there was an evident relief from fear and anxiety all around. The maids were casting admiring glances at the soldiers, who in turn told them and each other how they had fought off the attempted night assault. As I heard them rehash the events of the night I wondered whether they really believed the stories they told. Maybe they did, and maybe they didn't. Maybe they only half believed them. They must have known they were exaggerating, yet convinced there was a core of truth in it.
	We paraded that morning at eleven. It would have beeti customary for the sergeant to do the drilling. I changed that. I told him to take over the calisthenics and give them fifteen minutes of that, let them rest for ten minutes, and I would take over the drill after that. I had no conscious reason for wanting to do the drilling myself, perhaps I wished to feel the power of command and to play at soldiering. Whatever the reason, that decision was to save my life later.
	I joined the men in calisthenics for I knew I was good at it. I took up position in front and set the lead. After the calisthenics were over and we were resting, one man told me, half smiling, half serious:
	"It takes a young limb to have a snap to it." There was laughter.
	"Young roosters hop high!" remarked another. There was more laughter. It made me feel good and I laughed with them.
	Afterward we had our drill. I did parade formations, evolutions, commanding them with drawn saber. All the servant maids, even the nurses, turned out to watch. The audience made the men strut. They drilled rather well and put a snap into it. They enjoyed it. By the end of the seventh day, when we left the sanatorium, I could have taken them to any parade ground. They were really good.
	I wonder why armies do not recruit female audiences. It would speed up basic training considerably.

