Tarazona another small Spanish town not far from Albacete. As I walked into the camp I was hailed right and left by comrades who knew me from the States. Their morale in general was low. Many of them wished that they had never volunteered, others were wishing to be sent to the front in a hurry, partly because they were eager to come to grips with the Fascists and partly to escape that camp. The military commander of the camp, Captain (later Major) Merriman was universally liked and respected, so was Lieutenant Bob Thompson, second in command, although to a lesser degree. The discontent of the volunteers, amounting to near hatred, was directed against Joe, the Battalion Commissar. They considered him a pompous and overriding autocrat who gloried in his power over them; they even accused him of appropriating the cigarettes, tobacco and other supplies sent from America for his own use to lead a life of luxury. Only Lieutenant Jack Cooper, a leading comrade of the Y.C.L. in Cleveland, commander of the battalion's machine gun section, had a good word to say for Dallet; he thought Joe was doing a good job trying to instill discipline in the battalion but perhaps he was somewhat highhanded and bureaucratic about it.

Joe Dallet welcomed me in friendly fashion. However, there was an unwonted reserve in his behavior which I couldn't help noting. His first words after the usual exchange of personal remarks were mocking.

"I bet you found Spain different than you thought!" he gloated. "A man stands on his own merit here and has a chance to show what he can really do."

This must have been a reference to our Ohio Bureau which had consistently criticized him about the haphazard quality of his work. I changed that subject quickly, congratulated him on his position, the highest then held by any American, equivalent to the rank of major, and asked him to tell me about his job.

He paced up and down, a tall, gaunt young man not yet thirty with a big mop of unruly dark hair, sucking on a vile-smelling Sherlock Holmes type pipe, giving me a lecture on the duties of a commissar taken verbatim from the same pamphlet I was then carrying in my pocket to brief myself on the subject. I let him talk on for a while then interrupted him, saying I wanted to know how he was translating those principles into practice.

His answer was revealing, far more revealing than I was in a position to judge then. Although he had been in his post less than three months he had become fully impregnated with that exalted feeling of self-importance which, as I had occasion to learn later, characterized most of those comrades in Spain who had suddenly found themselves elevated from obscure party posts into positions of great authority. Trained in the dictatorial practices prevailing in all Communist Parties these comrades became drunk with power and gloried in the knowledge that here in Spain at last they were in a position to enforce their dictates by jail sentences and even the firing squad.

I cannot think of a more shocking illustration of the above point than the remark made by Dave Doran, then newly appointed commissar of the XV Brigade, at a banquet honoring a visiting delegation of the American League Against War and Fascism. Those delegates, mostly well-meaning, liberal American women of the middle classes, were particularly intrigued by Dave's youth, he was twenty-eight, and the important position he held. They plied him with questions about the power he, as Brigade Commissar, wielded. Dave, who was visibly expanding under their adoration, straightened up in his chair and, surveying that huge table where, besides the delegates, most of the brigade staff were seated, asserted with pride:

"Well, I can have anyone seated at this table shot!"

The visiting delegates received this information with rapture, that was really something to take back home, to impress their friends with the importance of an American commissar they had encountered in person in Spain. It did not occur to any of them to inquire what could possibly have distorted the mind of a man that young to think of his position in those terms; to entertain the idea that it was within his power to order anyone in his sight, civilians and military personnel alike, placed before a firing squad and executed at his whim. The terrifying fact was that although Doran had no such authority, he had the actual power to do so and he could easily have excused such an action by charging his victims with, let's say, "counterrevolutionary Trotskyism," and even earned a further promotion
thereby.

But that was still in the future. Joe Dallet had never reached that mental state although the path he was following in Tarazona was leading in that direction. In his talk with me he kept harping on two words, "morale" and "discipline." He was determined to raise the morale of his battalion by the strictest measures against the "bad elements" whose conduct was a "disgrace to the Communist Party." His ideas on discipline were monastic: the men had to be regimented all their waking hours, denied leaves, prohibited from playing cards, from visiting the vino shops or, horrors, the bordellos. Those violating any of these regulations were severely punished. In addition, after drill the men were subjected to hours of daily "political education." I remembered those deadly monotonous political lectures we had been forced to attend in Almansa, telling us why Fascism and capitalism were bad and the Soviet Union and Communism were good, why we had to fight Fascism when our very presence in Spain was proof how well aware we were of that. I tried to point that out to Joe but he brushed that aside, he even questioned me, did I "actually oppose political education?" I had sense enough to deny that heresy promptly.

I asked Joe whether the disparateness between the living standards of a battalion commissar and his men had anything to do with the discontent. The pay of a commissar was 600 pesetas every ten days, in contrast to the 60 pesetas the men were receiving; also, he lived luxuriously compared to their monotonous fare. Wasn't that situation a factor? He rejected that, saying that it was not he who had set that large differential pay rate for officers and commissars; besides, it was more than just that officers who had all the responsibility should have preferential treatment. In fact, the one other thing he was going to root out in his battalion was the perverted idea held by the volunteers that the I.B. was supposed to be a people's army where both commanders and men received the same pay and rations on the basis of democratic equality. Such notions undermined discipline and an army had to be run by discipline. He was out to set an example, and speaking of example, he had assured his men time and time again that they could depend on his setting an example in battle and come the time, he would be the first man out of the trenches to lead the attack in person.

He was to keep that promise. The last time I met him was in early October 1937, just before the Mackenzie-Papineau Battalion was scheduled to meet its baptism of fire by going into an attack at Fuentes del Ebro. It was around ten o'clock at night by the time I located him. I found him sitting alone in a small hut by the dim light of an oilwick. He was very lonely; he greeted me with genuine warmth this time, grateful for my presence. I had come to learn his immediate orders and plans pertaining to the impending battle but Joe was more interested in recalling the past, our personal exploits in Ohio, confiding that he felt completely isolated from everyone. Although I assured him that in my observation his battalion was in far superior battle shape than any of our other battalions on the eve of their first battle, which could be attributed mainly to his unflagging efforts, he knew that his men were not appreciative and that he was unpopular with them.

He kept repeating he would now prove to them by his personal example that he had had only their welfare in mind in driving them hard to become good soldiers; he would be the first over the parapet to demonstrate he was not one of those "safe behind the line Albacete generals," but a leader who fully shared the dangers to which he exposed his men.

I tried to reason him out of that obsession. I remonstrated that it was a poor way to provide leadership for an entire battalion, that by jumping off with the first wave he would lose control of directing the battle, which was his main responsibility. But Joe was adamant. He insisted on proving himself to his men and I left him with a heavy heart.

He saw me shivering in the cold outdoors and presented me with his own poncho, a charcoal black, warm woolen one, far superior to those issued by the Loyalist Army, also with a pistol. Pistols sold at a high price and I couldn't afford one. Despite my position I ranked as a private and my pay was only six pesetas a day. Before we parted, Joe indulged in a, for him, unusual gesture. He put his arm around me and told me to remember him.

Joe Dallet remained true to his promise. He was the first one out of the trenches after giving the signal for the attack and was cut down immediately after advancing but a few yards toward the Fascist lines. He was hit in the groin and suffered agonies, yet he waved back the First-Aid men, refusing to let them risk sure death in an attempt to reach him. He was trying to crawl back unaided when a fresh burst from a machine gun blasted life out of him.

Joe knew he had to die to redeem the prestige of a commissar to justify in is own eyes the path he had followed in Spain, a victim of his own Communist training.

<em>Requiescat . . .</em>
