Have you ever been alone?

Alone for nearly three weeks, in midwinter, groping from one desolate mountain to another in heavy snow until your very thoughts seemed to have congealed; sleeping in abandoned stone huts, chewing on rock-hard chunks of granite-gray Spanish bread with aching jaws blue with cold? That's what it took to catch up with the brigade which was on the move from Teruel.

The commissariat was quartered in a couple of huts near the brigade command post but Doran was away at a meeting with the XXXV Division to which our brigade belonged. Comrade Robert Cooney, chief of the commissariat, was a ruddy, round-faced young Scotsman—he did not know what assignment Doran had in mind for me but told me I could spend the night there and report to Doran next morning. I threw my musette into a corner and went outside. That musette contained all my chattels and worldly goods—an extra pair of wool hose, a number of notebooks, a few packs of cigarettes, a battered old can that served both as soup bowl and drinking cup, an aluminum spoon, a canteen, and two clips of ammunition for my pistol. Not much of a fortune for a man past thirty-seven but enough for my kind of party functionary—we were the 20th century red monks who had renounced wealth for the Hammer and Sickle, to spread the gospel of Marx and Lenin and the glory and the kingdom of the proletariat.

Outside I bumped into Dave Gordon, a former leading member of the Ohio Bureau whom I had known for years. I greeted him enthusiastically but his response was considerably more restrained. He was a prematurely bald, undersized man in his late twenties who had practically been raised in the party. He had held leading positions since his teens but his political future in the party was already behind him. He was highly intelligent but self-indulgent and vindictive, known for his intrigues and readiness to stick his political knife in the back of any of his associates at the opportune moment.

I knew from Laurence that Gordon had got himself in the doghouse here in Spain also, first because of his intrigues against the leadership in the training camp, secondly by having asked to be sent home because of an alleged chronic stomach ailment which the doctors could neither localize nor discover.

As we exchanged information about the Ohio comrades I detected a bitter streak of jealousy in his comments. Frank Rogers was commissar of the Mac-Pap battalion, John Gates was then acting base commissar in Albacete in place of Laurence who had gone back home, Jack Cooper was a captain and commander of the brigade machine gun company—excellent backgrounds for all of them for a future career in the party back home, while Gordon's accomplishments were, if anything, on the negative side. I sensed he was somewhat jealous even of me although it was well known in Ohio and in the movement in general that I had no political ambitions whatever and was not in rivalry with anyone. While we talked Gordon belched continuously which I found disconcerting. He blamed it on his bad stomach saying he wouldn't want to discuss that, he preferred to suffer with it rather than be mistaken for a malingerer. I had my reservations about that; I noticed that he was swallowing air regularly and then belching it up, presumably to back up his claim of stomach trouble.

Gordon was on the staff of the commissariat. His job was preparing speakers' outlines on current events for political discussions in the brigade. He guessed I would be assigned to the brigade's daily mimeographed news bulletin and he seemed relieved when he heard I had no intention of joining the staff of the commissariat, that I wanted a military assignment.

The next morning I reported to Doran at the brigade command post. Compared to his last appearance he was now smartly dressed in a tailored military uniform. We had met only a few times previously and although he had been friendly and courteous we had not established any personal relationship. He was a humorless dead-end kid grown into manhood during the extreme privations of the depression, leading the hobolike existence of the penniless Young Communist League organizer around the mining regions of Pittsburgh. He was about twenty-nine, elevated to his present post by a chain of fortuitous events. Arriving in Spain just before our Brunete offensive and assigned to the Brigade Commissariat as assistant to Steve Nelson, the Brigade Commissar, Doran happened to come across a propaganda truck equipped with a loudspeaker just when the assault on Belchite reached its critical stage. With quick presence of mind Doran brought the truck up and talked a pocket of resisting Fascist troops into surrender. A few days later, when Nelson was wounded, Doran became acting Brigade Commissar. After Nelson was sent back home the Party decided that inasmuch as most volunteers in the brigade were young and members of the Young Communist League, the post of brigade commissar in the future should be held by a member of the Young Communist League, and since Doran was already acting commissar, the post went to him.

As it happened, in Doran's case this worked out fine; he took to military life like a duck to water. Brigade Commander Lieutenant Colonel Vladimir Copic, himself a former commissar, was an old-time Yugoslav Communist well versed in the rules of playing the party game—grab all the credit but make sure to have someone on hand to blame when things backfired. Dave was a fighting man by instinct and he was happy to devote his time to military matters. Lieutenant Colonel Copic was eager to encourage that trait; he wasn't much of an organizer and two heads were better than one. Dave did most of Copic's military work which left Copic time to build up his political fences with the Russian military advisers and other
higher-ups in the I.B. Doran was a strong disciplinarian and did not hesitate to employ measures from which Copic would shrink. Copic was essentially a very vain person, a one-time aspiring opera singer; he demanded applause and much of it. Dave had no such limitations to curb his drive—he was the more determined military man of the two.

Doran eyed me steadily while I explained why the brigade book was late. I blamed it all on the paper shortage. He charged I had violated his orders, I should have stayed in Madrid until the book was finished. I refused to be thrown off balance, I told him I had stayed until we ran out of paper. Captain Ryan was there, no purpose would have been served by both of us idling away our time in Madrid. I wanted to be with the brigade where I could be of more use.

Dave now switched to a conversational tone, asked me what I thought of Bill Laurence, and a number of other leading comrades in Spain—the regular double-edged party trick to size up where a man stood and perchance obtain some derogatory information on one's rivals. I spoke well of Laurence and of all the rest, which seemed to satisfy him. He then informed me that Johnny Gates had also transferred to the brigade, he had come up last night, what was my opinion of him?

I spoke of Gates highly and said Gates had an air of modesty about him that had a good effect on the men. Doran was very much interested when I related how I had located Gates at the Cordoba front, how well his Brigade Commander and his Brigade Commissar spoke of him. I must have given a higher opinion of Gates than Doran apparently would have preferred—they were both of the Y.C.L., hence potential rivals—because Doran quickly retorted that popularity with the men was not necessarily a desirable trait in a commissar, that he personally wasn't interested in winning popularity contests but in building the XV Brigade into the best fighting unit in the I.B. He then rose abruptly before I could ask about my assignment and told me to go down to the brigade ammo dump, pack a mule, and take a load of munitions up to the Mac-Paps who were under attack.

The ammo depot was not very busy. The mule then being loaded with cases of rifle and machine gun bullets was for someone else who, to my surprise, turned out to be Johnny Gates. He waved and was on his way before they even started loading my mule.

The front line was about five miles away on a mountain top with only a single trail leading to it. At first I had difficulties with my mule. He was poorly loaded and I had to readjust the cases that shifted. Then the mule became balky. I goaded him in English, then in Spanish, but without result. Finally in exasperation I cursed him in Hungarian. For some inexplicable reason that struck a responsive chord in him, he pricked up his ears and got going. I wondered what ancestral memories those Hungarian curses had awakened in him; one of his remote progenitors must have accompanied the Huns, Tartars, or Turks on their invasions of Hungary.

The Fascists, who had been taken by surprise by our night attack, rallied by the time I was halfway up and opened up with artillery. They started shelling the trail and as each shell screamed in I instinctively ducked or flung myself to the ground. This was not the first time by any means that I was under fire in Spain, but on those other occasions I had exposed myself to it voluntarily. Those other times I had been a visitor to the fronts, always knowing in the back of my mind that I could withdraw at will. This was different. Now I was under orders and had to walk into it. I was now afraid and reluctant to move I had to force myself to get to my feet. Luckily the range wasn't too accurate, the closest explosion missed me by about twenty yards, and by figuring percentages I soon persuaded myself to ignore the shelling and pretend unconcern. I steeled myself not to duck when I heard a shell overhead and soon learned to distinguish between the near ones and those passing over. The trouble with the mule also helped. The mule, not being a reasoning animal and ignorant of percentages, stupidly refused to advance into danger. He tried to bolt and drag me back every time he heard a shell—it took all my physical strength to pull him forward. I caught up with Johnny Gates and we made our way together to the Mac-Pap battalion command post. On the way we encountered stretcher-bearers evacuating shellfire casualties. They were young boys rather badly mangled, one of them seemed dead.

We discovered Major Cecil E. Smith, a former Canadian Army sergeant now Battalion Commander, and Frank Rogers, Battalion Commissar, with a small group of officers standing under an olive tree. We headed there with our mules. They started shouting to us to stop and get the hell under some other tree. The battalion Command Post was being shelled and we were under direct observation. We tied our mules to an olive tree and crossed to the battalion staff.

The atmosphere was tense. Our night <em>golpe de mano</em> (a surprise attack, literally "strike with the fist") had caught the Fascists by surprise. The battalion took the Fascist trenches with but few casualties and then braced itself for the inevitable counterattack. The morning had been comparatively quiet. The Fascist command, preparing for its spring offensive, had not anticipated any Loyalist attacks, particularly in that quiet sector. They needed time to react. But their reconnaissance planes had been busy since daybreak and by noon they had already managed to move in sufficient artillery to subject us to heavy fire. Fascist bomber and fighter planes were due any moment, for the Fascists were observed getting ready for a counterattack.

Frank Rogers whom I hadn't seen for months wanted to know what the hell I was doing, picking that time for a visit. When I proudly informed him that I had finally managed to transfer to the Brigade and had just brought up some ammunition, he wanted to know who in hell asked me to do that, they had plenty of ammo, the battalion had its ammo supply well organized. I told him those were Doran's orders. This made him frown and he told me in a quiet aside: "Doran is testing you and is doing the same with Gates. The bastard ought to know better, you've both been around."

That thought had not occurred to me and I did not like it. I was happy to take that ammo up feeling I was contributing to the actual fighting right from the start; this made me feel like a foolish schoolboy. I told Frank I would like to transfer to his battalion. He said they sure could use me and that he would discuss it with Major Smith.

On the way back the Fascist planes became more numerous. I noticed more and more formations coming up from all directions, mostly fighting planes concentrating for an attack. They struck just as I was leaving the trail for the highway to Segura de los Baños.

The Fascist planes came in fast and low, lower than I had even seen them, the air throbbed and the ground vibrated with the roar of their motors. I watched them with rising tension, still the visiting observer but nonparticipant, when I saw the first bombs fall. They exploded sufficiently far from me not to make me too apprehensive although the concussion set my ears ringing and I had to open my mouth to equalize the pressure. Then came the strafing and I was no longer a bystander. Planes with their machine guns wide open came swooping down the road. I yanked the halter frantically but the mule stood braced with its four legs wide apart. I let go and dove down the embankment as plane after plane with hurricane force swept by so low that their propellers almost sucked me up, the ta-ta-ta of their machine guns approaching like ugly ogres in hundred- league boots rattling iron sticks on a giant fence. When the planes were gone, I climbed up the embankment. The mule was on his side, dead, his belly ripped wide open, his eyes glazed; the steam from the big mound of excrement at the base of his tail was mingling with the steam from his entrails. I felt very sorry for the mule but had no time for contemplation, another large formation of planes was coming up. I rushed down the embankment, ran across the barranco, and dove into a stone hut on the other side just as the bombs began dropping.

The hut shook, loosing clouds of dirt and dust from the rafters and stirring up the dry straw on the floor. I was choking and rolled under the stone trough, rising and falling with the trembling ground while titanic smoking fists beat down outside. The immediate strafing that followed was somewhat of a relief; by contrast the hardest part was over. As soon as my eyes cleared a bit I ran out. The air was hazy with smoke and dust and I heard screams. I ran toward the sound and saw other dim figures rise and run in the same direction. The screams seemed to come from a large smoking crater and a number of men, all Spaniards, were running around yelling in panic, not seeming to know what to do. I rallied a couple of them, shouted to the others to come around, and set them digging with their bare hands.

We had just got the first man out, he was limp with no visible wounds but he seemed dead, when a major came running down the hill yelling at the top of his lungs in half-German, half-Spanish that the division observation post in the church tower had been hit trapping General Walter, the Division Commander, inside. He wanted us to go back with him. The men hesitated and looked at me. I told them to go on digging, and  directed the major down the road to get other help. I had met Walter a few times; he was a general with a large staff and I knew that in a minute or two he would have all the help he needed and then some, while if we left, the men here would surely die, no one would hurry back here to get them out. The German major demanded my name and I told him Juan Gomez; the dust and smoke was too thick for him to recognize me later. He left cursing and on the run. Later I learned I had been right in my decision. We rescued five men. General Walter's post had not collapsed, he had suffered no damage outside a few minor scratches.

When I finally returned to the Commissariat I found a bit of excitement. The hut in which I had slept the night before had been hit by a shell. I found my musette intact under the debris and recovered it; it was good to see that faithful companion again.

That evening I went back to Dave Doran about my assignment. I asked for a military post and told him about my military background. Dave did not see it my way. He explained that the Brigade had changed considerably since the early days in Jarama. The days of battle-green officers, untrained commissars and men were long past. Most of the officers were graduates of the I.B. Officers' Training Schools, the others had gained their experience in the field; in short, the Brigade had developed its military leaders out of its own ranks. I had not undergone any basic training, I was too old for a rifleman and had no field experience in command. He had other plans for me. The British needed a battalion commissar and had asked for Bob Cooney but he had no one capable of taking Cooney's place until Gates and I came up. Gates was younger; he was sending him to the Lincoln to assist the battalion commissar. He wanted me to replace Cooney as Chief of the Brigade Commissariat. The Commissariat needed reorganization badly and also to be turned into an efficient political staff. He was too busy with military work; he needed an assistant who knew how to act on his own without running to him for a decision every time something came up.

I resented being considered old, although I had to admit my heart did no longer take kindly to the mountainous terrain. I asked him just what exactly was the function of the Chief of the Commissariat? Doran answered that it was something like the Organizational Secretary to the District Organizer, to work closely with the Brigade Commissar and see that the political directives were implemented and carried out throughout the Brigade. It was a position parallel to the Chief of Staff to the Brigade. When I asked for particulars, exactly what I and the commissariat were expected to do, he told me to talk it over with Bob Cooney, work out a plan and program on the basis of our talk, and report back to him the next day. I still wasn't keen on it and asked him how about assigning me to the observers or military intelligence but he cut me short; it was a decision and those were his orders. He was curt and formal about that—he made me know that was where informal discussions ended and official relationships began.

Cooney's dour face lit up at the news. It was obvious he was eager to get away, he must have disliked working with Doran very much. I had a difficult time keeping him with me long enough to give me a few pointers. He must have approved of my approach in his fashion, for later, when I was with the British battalion during our Ebro counteroffensive, he was about as friendly to me as the British were capable of being to any American.

The next morning I typed out a proposed departmentalization and a program of work for the Commissariat. My party experiences came in handy.

I found Dave free, lolling in the forenoon sun on the hillside in front of the Brigade Command dugout, and took my plan to him. I read it to him and we discussed it point by point, Dave generally approving, making suggestions here and there. We were about a third finished when the Fascists began sporadically shelling us and a shell landed on our hillside less than a hundred feet away. Naturally I looked up and found Dave affecting unconcern, his eyes fixed on me. I took the cue, if the sonofabitch was still testing me, I could play it as well as he. I read on placidly even though the shelling became more regular, they were 75-mms. and came in at about two-minute intervals, exploding at random. I would look up after every sentence await- ing his comments but as the shelling continued his comments gradually ceased and I saw him getting tauter, watching me with eyes narrowed to a slit. He wanted me to make the first move but I wouldn't oblige. The shells now landed in more rapid succession, I guessed two batteries were firing. There was no sense to this idiotic game but he had called it, it was up to him to halt it. I kept reading on when a shell struck one of our observation posts about thirty feet away. I saw men running toward the struck post but I went on reading. Dave now rose abruptly and said my plan was fine, he was in full agreement, I had full authority to go ahead, and stalked into the dugout. I stood there in seeming unconcern until I saw him disappear and then took to my heels, running as fast as I could until I found a hollow to dive into. When the shelling ceased I went back to the commissariat.

The first man I bumped into was Dave Gordon who congratulated me. I didn't know what for and he told me he had heard I was going to be appointed Chief of the Brigade Commissariat; the comrades in Ohio would be proud of me.

I was a long way from Ohio and was proud of nothing. The games Doran seemed to like to play were too sadistic for my liking. I walked away from Gordon and without being aware of it I found myself humming a song I had picked up from the seamen in the Almansa battery, those "bad elements" the battery commissar was forever trying to suppress.

<blockquote>
We're a bunch of bastards,
  Bastards are we;
We'd rather f . . . than fight
  For Liber-teee!
Aye, Brother, aye, and up your arse!
</blockquote>
