It was the summer of 1928, and I was starting on a new play dealing with some events of the 1918 October Revolution in Hungary. I had been an ignorant participant in those events and much to my chagrin I discovered that this ignorance, despite the intervening years, still persisted.
To turn them into a good play those incidents had to relate to universal experience and I found myself beyond my depth. The background was a historical one.

In the late spring of 1918, having graduated 14th in my class from the Infantry Officers School in Hungary at the age of seventeen, I was unexpectedly assigned to the artillery for further training as an artillery officer. That transfer gave me my first glimpse of the great class differentiation as it existed in Hungary.
Service in the artillery in the positional warfare of the First World War was incomparably safer than in the Infantry.
The artillery officer lived in the lap of luxury. Billeted in comfortable quarters well behind the trenches, he ate good food well prepared, he was warm and clean, and his access to the official officers' bordello was limited only by his own libido.
This privileged branch of service became the refuge for the scions of the aristocracy, the wealthy, and those with political and social influence, no matter how ignorant.
As a result, by 1918 the Army found itself in desperate need of competent junior artillery officers in the field. To remedy the situation, it adopted a policy of picking out the cream of the[16  ]young plebeian graduates from the Infantry Officers School, transferring them to the artillery, giving them accelerated training, and sending them to the front. I was one of the cadets so transferred.
Curiously, I was rather unhappy over the transfer. I was romantic, full of patriotism and loyalty, looking forward impatiently to front service, to assuming command of a platoon, to distinguishing myself in action, to taking over a company, maybe to reorganizing under fire the remnants of several companies into a battalion, and then who knows…
Because of my army indoctrination I was completely blind to the war weariness of the population, although I should have had at least an inkling of that because of one incident.
Shortly before graduation, we had been suddenly alerted and called into readiness to put down a threatening antiwar strike and demonstration in a near-by town, scheduled to begin on May 1. Along with the other cadets I repeated with outraged vehemence those sections of the Articles of War the Colonel read to us as we were drawn up in ranks ready to depart, armed with rifles, hand grenades, mortars and machine guns. In essence it ran:
"I will remain loyal to my Emperor and King. I will execute all my orders in blind obedience, shooting down my father, my mother, my own brothers and sisters without a moment of hesitation, if so ordered…"
Tt was a grim order and I would have carried it out, too, such was the strength of loyalty inculcated in me. I consoled myself with the fact that it was most unlikely for my father or mother to engage in treasonable activities, and that my brothers and sisters were far too young. Had that demonstration not been called off I know we would have aimed well and shot to kill men, women, and children without hesitation until ordered to cease fire
That episode meant nothing to me at that time, nor did I guess[17] that it foreshadowed events soon to come—the end of the war, revolution. Going on the presumption that the war would go on forever I was impatient to leave for the front, disappointed by this transfer which disrupted my plans.
I reported to the Artillery Officers School in Kobanya, outside Budapest, with considerable misgivings. Artillery officers had to supply their own uniforms and the cost of these was greater than a man like me, without private means, could afford from his pay. I also knew I would be out of my social element among those wealthy scions.
My apprehensions proved justified. Out of four hundred-odd cadets in that school there were only about thirty like me who had been transferred from the infantry. The rest of the cadets looked upon us "proletarians," although that term was not familiar to me then, with that total disinterest that is akin to contempt. We were not ignored, we were simply not noticed except during the performance of our official duties.
Represented among them were many historically prominent names which were familiar to every Hungarian schoolboy. I myself was amazed to find that a count or a baron with a legendary name was as often as not a commonplace, often pimply, gangly youngster, sometimes handsome and robust but more often not, exactly like the kids I had known at home.
It was easy to tell us apart. Most of us still wore our infantry uniforms with artillery patches sewed on. As an added hardship the school had neither a mess nor sleeping quarters for officers, only for enlisted personnel. I was obliged to rent a cheap furnished room and worry about providing my meals. The other cadets lived in their own private apartments, two or sometimes three together, complete with cook and sometimes even a valet, frequented good restaurants and clubs in Budapest.
Even the training program had been devised to suit their convenience. Classes started at eight, adjourned at eleven; afternoon classes started at two, finished by five. No classes were held over[18] the week ends. Having just come from the grueling Infantry Officers School with its Spartan discipline, I found myself lost In this new sybarite environment.
I was also lonely. One would expect that we, "the brains," as our instructors referred to us in a half-condescending, half-derogatory manner, would be drawn to each other. But that was not the case. In that environment we ourselves were ashamed of our pitifully small means and tried to hide it from one another. In addition, since we outranked the other cadets, we were loaded up with duties as Officer of the Day, Officer of the Guard, Officer of the Stables, etc. This was unfair and against regulations but we did not object. When on duty we got our meals free.
I spent most of my free time in my miserable furnished room rented from a poor family not far from the school, subsisting mostly on food sent by my family at great self-denial to themselves. The man sitting next to me in one of my classes was Keresztessy, the scion of an old landholding family. He was a broad-chested, very strong, dark-visaged young man with a very low hairline who seemed always to be scowling. He walked in a hunched, apelike manner, his hands practically at a level with his knees. Aside from formal nodding and greeting, we had never talked. He would come in at the last minute, nod to me, and then say in a polite, formal manner:
"May I see your papers, please."
He would then copy them and return them to me with a quiet "Thank you" as one thanks a waiter for bringing a glass of water.
One day we were coming back from the riding school when Keresztessy rode up to me and said:
"Sandor, are you off duty this Saturday?"
"Why?" I asked in surprise. This was the first time he had spoken to me outside of the usual routine or called me by my first name.
"Would you care to come to Five O'clock Tea tomorrow?"[19]
I was totally dumbfounded. No man in Hungary, to my knowledge, would ever drink tea unless he was sick or eccentric. I had never tasted tea in my life. The Hungarians I knew would drink coffee, and wine, and beer, and slivovitz and plenty of it. But tea! It was hard for me to visualize Keresztessy, that scowling hunk of a man, sipping tea delicately as depicted in those few English romances I had read in Hungarian translation. The Hungarian aristocracy was known for their aping of English and French customs, so I could easily conceive of Five O'clock Tea having been adopted by them. But tea and Keresztessy simply did not go together.
"Tea?" I asked, bewildered.
Keresztessy explained. He was in love with a cousin of his, a second cousin, Elizabeth, who was sixteen. Elizabeth had an English governess whose job it was to be both companion and chaperon to her. Nancy, the governess, was very broadminded about her duties and would leave them alone as much as possible at her home, but there were too many interruptions. Elizabeth would love to visit his apartment but Nancy was balking at that. Nancy's reasons were personal. As an Englishwoman she was an enemy alien technically in internment, released in custody of Elizabeth's parents; she was lonesome and pining for a boy friend. Elizabeth told Keresztessy if he could only provide an other man to keep Nancy company her objections to the visit would disappear. So he thought of asking me.
I was flattered and eager to go. After all, a cup of tea couldn't kill me. But I was a bit suspicious.
"Just how old is Nancy? What does she look like?"
Keresztessy was vague.
"She is old, sort of skinny and blondish." When he saw my dismay he hastened to add:
"But not wrinkled old and she has sort of a nice face."
I agreed to go, what the hell! I had never seen an English woman, nor an Englishman for that matter. I might as well come face to face with one of those perfidious Albions I had heard so much about. There was, however, one doubt in my mind.
"Wouldn't I be violating the Articles of War by having contact with the enemy?"
Keresztessy just waved his hand in dismissal.
"Why, everybody knows Nancy. All the ministers and generals who come to Elizabeth's house. After all, she is only a governess."
When I got to Keresztessy's apartment punctually at five the next afternoon, Elizabeth and Nancy were already there. Elizabeth was a buxom, cherry-ripe girl with undulating hips and coquettish brown eyes, radiant with vitality.
Nancy was old. She must have been at least twenty-six, maybe even twenty-eight. For a woman that age she had a very nice face that was almost transparently pale, but it wasn't really, she had rosy spots on her cheeks. She had a beautifully chiseled profile and a rather subdued smile. Her movements were smooth, she did not bustle around like Elizabeth, and she was much taller  than the average Hungarian girl, nearly as tall as I. Nor was she quite as skinny as Keresztessy had described her, although she certainly was far from buxom.
Keresztessy's apartment was furnished simply. Its most conspicuous features were a large mounted elk's antler on the wall over the bed and a thick Hungarian hard salami, at least a yard long, hanging by a string from the ceiling above the center of the table—-a real mark of luxury in that starved country, then its fifth year of war.
The huge table was piled high with food: a country smoked ham, dry sausages, jars of jam, a huge cartwheel of home-baked bread, a large nut rollade, another rollade filled with poppy seeds, bottles of wine and liqueur. The table was in disorder, a new pair of knee-length boots nestling against the bread. The table had not been set and there were no signs of plates, cups, or silver.
The introductions and greetings over, Keresztessy picked up[21] a huge bread knife, reached up and hacked off three thick slabs of salami for Elizabeth, Nancy, and himself, and then handed the knife to me to help myself. I did and we all ate, Keresztessy and I drinking wine, Elizabeth and Nancy sipping apricot brandy. There was little conversation while we ate and Nancy said nothing.
I was still chewing on my salami when Keresztessy got up and told Elizabeth to ask Nancy to show me the other room. Elizabeth laughed and started to talk with Nancy in English, which neither Keresztessy nor I understood. Their speech sounded very fast. It must have been funny, too, because they both giggled a lot.
Finally Nancy rose, took me by the hand, and said in her broken Hungarian. "Come, I will show."
She led me to a door, Elizabeth following us. There was a key in the lock. No sooner did Nancy and I enter than I heard the door close, the key turn, and the lock click. Elizabeth had played a joke on us and locked us in.
The room was of fair size, furnished with a large bed and a hard chair alongside to throw clothes on. It held a sunken bath tub, a pipe from a coil gas heater on the far wall led to the tub to supply instantaneous hot water. This invention was entirely new to me. I went over and examined it at length. Nancy, in the meantime, had seated herself on the bed. After I had studied the diagram and all the printed instructions I sat down gingerly on the chair near the bed. I wasn't at all at ease.
Nancy was sitting with her legs drawn up, her arms enfolding her legs, her chin resting on her knees. She was looking at me and I was looking straight ahead at the hot water heater, although by then I was so familiar with it I could have lectured on it in class.
"Why you no speak?" asked Nancy in her broken Hungarian. "Is it because I am enemy?" Now I had to look at her directly.
"Women and children are not considered enemies unless they[22] are bearing arms," I answered. I knew my Articles of War.
‘Perhaps is it you not like Englishwomen?" she persisted.
I assured her I liked Englishwomen very much. I did not consider ourselves sufficiently well acquainted to reveal to her certain intimate personal facts about myself, such as my extremely meager experiences with Englishwomen—or other women that matter.
She slid forward on the bed, closer to my chair, her feet dangling right by my face. She had nice slender legs.
"Perhaps is it you not like me?" Her voice was pleasant, although pitched much higher than that of the throaty Hungarian girls
"No, I do like you," I protested but because of my embarrassment it did not sound emphatic.
"Perhaps you not like me because I haven't many breasts?" she complained in her curiously high voice. Her Hungarian was asssuredly very poor. I felt impelled to correct her.
"You do have two. Two is all that Hungarian girls have." This lesson in grammar must have pleased her for she laughed and laughed. But I was feeling more and more uncomfortable and suddenly started perspiring.
"Hungarian language so difficult to learn. I always mix ‘much' with ‘many.' I wanted to say my breasts small, not much like Hungarian girls have. Regard!" She straightened up, linked her fingers behind her neck, inhaled and threw her chest out. Considering she was only a woman she had quite a chest expansion.
I was conscious of a deep blush spreading all over my face. It was most embarrassing to regard, yet I regarded. They did not seem small. I so told her and added that she seemed to be in fine physical condition.
She laughed again. But she appeared to be flushed also. She leaned down, took my hand, lifted it, pressed it to her blouse, and asked:[23]
"Feel how little?"
That demonstration did not bear out her contention nor seemed there to be any direct ratio between volume and sensation. Her breasts, although small, felt fully adequate—size seemed to have no bearing on the subject. I realized that the initiative had now been passed to me.
I rose and sat down on the bed next to her, putting my arm clumsily around her shoulders. Obvidusly the situation called for kissing. Then I realized I had committed a tactical error; I had moved without having reconnoitered the terrain in advance for the required operation and my deployment was all wrong. I had taken up position sitting on the edge of the bed, side by side, with my right arm around her shoulders. It was a most disadvantageous embarking point from which to turn her flank and maneuver her into the face-to-face position which, in my experience, was essential to kissing. It was quite a problem and I was brooding over the solution.
Nancy, although she had not attended two Officers Training Schools as I had, proved to be the better tactician. She hit upon the Macedonian evolution. She reached out her right arm, turned my flank by pivoting my left shoulder, put her left arm around me, and there we were, face to face. The most elementarl maneuver in the book. She then kissed me. Then I kissed her. We then both kissed, and kissed again. And once more. Then, she said,
"You warm. Your collar hurt. Take jacket yours off."
It was uncanny how right she was. I was more than warm, I was burning. I was very much inclined to take my tunic off but doubted the propriety of it. It was a most uneasy situation. I looked at my watch. It was way past five o'clock, nearer to six.
"What about the tea?" I asked.
Nancy burst into loud laughter.
"Geza not have tea. He not have even pot and cups. Tea only for, invitation was. Come." She helped me off with my tunic, we kissed again and then we both undressed.
It was nearly eight o'clock when we heard knocking and the door was unlocked. The three hours had really flown. It was high time for Nancy to chaperon Elizabeth back home.
Five O'clock Tea had been an all-around success. It was agreed that we would have tea together as often as possible. To assure my availability as chaperon for Nancy, Keresztessy invited me to share his flat with him.
For weeks thereafter my supper often consisted of a chunk of hard salami, a hunk of bread, and Five O'clock Tea. It was a well balanced repast and agreed with me fine.
