Wednesday afternoon I left the shop early. I didn't tell the boss why and he didn't ask. My arm was still stiff and I had hardly done any work anyway. I had blamed my injury on a fall and nobody in the shop had questioned it. I met the unit organizer at Pennsylvania Station and we took the subway to Times Square, shuttled over to Grand Central, and took the local uptown. The laundry was located in Harlem, near the East River.

On the way uptown I read over one of the leaflets and I was dismayed. It had been crudely mimeographed, a blotchy, messy job, you felt like throwing it away unread. The message it contained was even worse.

Whoever wrote that leaflet was addicted to those long, involved, intricate sentences that impede the flow of the original thought, obscure enough to begin with. The general drift of it was that the workers in that laundry were being exploited and brutally oppressed by the Wall Street imperialists and finance capitalists, who were doing the same thing in China and other parts of the world. In order to better their miserable conditions and wretched existence, the leaflet urged them to build the TUUL, organize the Laundry Workers Industrial Union, and defend the Soviet Union.

It was a general tract utterly divorced from actual life. It could have been equally directed to any group of workers by simply changing the word "laundry" to that of some other industry. It took many years for the inept Communist Party to learn that workers in different industries had to be approached specifically, that one hat did not cover them all. That leaflet was as practical, in a reverse sort of a way, as those articles in the Sunday magazine sections that explained how easy the road to riches actually was; how others have become rich by simply getting hold of a few mines, railroads, banks, then consolidating and merging them—a real practical guide, any American could do it easily if he went about it the right way.

I was questioning in my mind if there was any sense to distributing those leaflets when the train lurched and threw me back against the seat. My arm started to throb again and then I was sure there was good sense to it. "The sonofabitches!" Some seed might take hold, some seed might sprout . . . Had that general party mobilization not been a flop, had we had a few thousand more workers at that demonstration, we could have made hash of those horses, we could have chewed up those policemen!

The laundry loomed huge and grim in the dusk, the big windows shone dull yellow from the electric lights burning inside. It was nearly five, the workers would be coming out soon. We took up positions a half block away from the gate, on the left sidewalk where most of them would be passing. I suggested that we each take one sidewalk but the unit organizer advised that we stay together, and I readily saw her point.

The employees' entrance suddenly opened wide and the workers started coming out. Most of them were women, mainly Negroes, but there were a few whites among them too, mostly men.

The older women walked quickly and usually singly, the younger ones more slowly and in groups of two or more. We thrust our leaflets at them as they passed us. Most of them ignored us and some even pushed our hands away, but a few accepted the leaflets and glanced at them before putting them in their handbags or pockets. The crowd soon began to thin and we were coaxing them loudly: "Here, take it, take it home and read it, it will tell you all about the union," and so on. Some of the workers were definitely hostile, particularly the men, but most of them manifested indifference. A few of those who took the leaflets did so with a smile.

The crowd was now definitely gone, only a few stragglers were coming out of the laundry. We hadn't done too well, we still had most of our leaflets left. Two Negro girls were approaching and I offered them each a leaflet, saying:

"Here, take this, this will do you good."

They stopped in front of me chuckling and looked me over provocatively. They were nearly as tall as I, young looking, full bodied, their laughter was deep and rich. One of them slowly pushed my arm away and said:

"I got somethin' too, that'll do you good, white boy. How'd you like a nice black pussy for a dollar?"

They both laughed and that made me smile too although I was a bit embarrassed. Then the other one spoke up.

"How about it, white boy? How'd you like to change your luck?"

Now they really laughed. I turned away from them and they left, chuckling deep in their throats.

The show was over, it had lasted less than twenty minutes. I felt very low. I had quit my shop early to help these laundry workers to a better life and not only were most of them indifferent but some were downright hostile and insulting. It was a difficult task indeed to elevate the masses!

The unit organizer was in an entirely different mood. She was elated over our success and told me she would report our accomplishment directly to the District. She praised my effort, told me I was quite an extraordinary new member, and invited me to her house for a bite to eat and a glass of tea to warm up. I declined. It was too early for dinner and I wasn't cold, I was wearing my new camel's hair coat.

I went home, changed, went out for dinner, came back, picked up a book to read but was unable to concentrate on it. My mind kept going back to that laundry. I relived that scene, the workers swarming through the gate, their walk, their faces, their gestures, how they ignored or waved aside the leaflets, the look on the faces of those who had accepted them. It was an endless procession of images and it wouldn't come to a halt.

I was listless and restless. I dropped the book and paced up and down in my room. I recalled those two Negro girls with their rich, throaty chuckle; the unit organizer inviting me to warm up with a hot glass of tea.

"Tea . . . !" It suddenly struck me. I knew now what the trouble was. I went to the phone and made a call.

The party did not answer.

I called a second number. She had a date for that evening. If only I had called a half hour sooner .

The third girl I called was out.

The fourth expressed herself as thrilled. However, she was indisposed.

"How about next Monday? Or if you're in the mood to spend a quiet evening . . .

I wasn't.

I called a fifth number. She had just left.

The sixth number didn't answer. It was no use. My thoughts went back to the unit organizer. She was chunky and had flashy gold teeth, yet she wasn't so bad. I decided to call her, then realized I did not know her phone number, nor her address. I put on a record but the music sounded flat.

All in all, quite a frustrating evening.