Shortly after I went on the <em>Uj Elore</em>, Comrade Lustig disappeared. My query as to what happened to him met with a shrug of the shoulder meaning it was none of my business. It wasn't and I soon forgot about him although from then on I had to carry most of his work load also.

My eight weeks were about up when Gus Mayer, Kovess' successor, called me in. He was a former blacksmith from Indiana, built like a bear; he gave the impression of massive strength and unshakable proletarian conviction and sincerity behind his rough manners. He asked, rather told me, that I was an American citizen, wasn't I? When I affirmed that, he growled:

"Go and get packed. You're leaving for Canada."

Before I had a chance to recover, Mayer outlined the situation. The Canadian Hungarian revolutionary movement had been organized three years previously by the American Hungarian Bureau. Within that short period of time the Canadian movement had grown to the point where it had started a weekly paper of its own. However, the Canadian Hungarians were mostly semiliterate peasants and they depended for top leadership and for editing their paper on comrades sent from United States. That's where Lustig was now. He was due to be relieved but the comrade sent to replace him, not being a citizen, had been turned back at the Canadian border, as was the second man sent after him. Lustig, who was a family man and eager to return, reported that he had reorganized the Canadian movement and it now had a firm leadership of its own. He proposed that I be sent to replace him; I was sufficiently qualified to edit their paper and that was all that was expected of me; the newly reorganized Canadian Bureau was strong enough to provide me with political leadership.

I protested immediately. All I had promised Kovess was that I'd help out the <em>Uj Elore</em> for two months and my time was up. I was quitting that Saturday.

"No, you won't!" Mayer banged on the table. "It is a party decision. You'll go to Canada or we'll expel you from the party and publicly expose you!"

"Go ahead!" I was mad. "You can start right now!" I headed for the door.

Mayer's attitude changed abruptly. He told me about those poor peasants lost in Canada without leadership, the prey of any Hungarian reactionary who might happen along. He accused me of being one of those bleeding hearts who cry over the plight of the ignorant, exploited masses but who wouldn't lift a linger to better their lot. He reminded me of some of the lectures I gave on evolution and on the origin of Christianity before Hungarian clubs and how well they were received—what right did I have to deny those peasants in Canada, so eager for the knowledge withheld from them by the feudal landlords of Hungary, to understand the world in which they live. Besides, it would be for two months only. That was my opportunity to live among the masses, among the proletarians, the real dispossessed, to learn from them and become a seasoned revolutionary.

I was tempted.

"For two months, did you say?"

"Yes, two months. This is a promise," he added solemnly. "I won't let you down. Any time you need any kind of assistance, money, just write me. I want you to take the train tonight."

I did not take the train that night, I left the day after. Mayer gave me twenty dollars for my fare and expenses, which indentally came to more than one hundred dollars. I had to buy a trunk and other travel gear; the Pullman ticket alone cost more than the twenty I had received from Mayer.

I turned my apartment over to Kovess who had asked for the use of it, promising he would take good care of it in my absence.

By the time I was relieved by the Bureau and returned from Canada, nine months later, my apartment was long gone—furnishings, books, and all.

I learned many things in that nine-month interval. The most important lesson, however, still eluded me.

A Communist promise binds only those to whom it is given, but it is never binding on the Communist leaders themselves.